 David Niven  James David Graham Niven (1 March 1910 – 29 July 1983) was an English actor, memoirist and novelist. His many roles included Squadron Leader Peter Carter in "A Matter of Life and Death", Phileas Fogg in "Around the World in 80 Days", and Sir Charles Lytton ("the Phantom") in "The Pink Panther." He won the Academy Award for Best Actor for his performance in "Separate Tables" (1958).  Born in London, Niven attended Heatherdown Preparatory School and Stowe before gaining a place at the Royal Military College, Sandhurst. After Sandhurst, he joined the British Army and was gazetted a second lieutenant in the Highland Light Infantry. Having developed an interest in acting, he left the army, travelled to Hollywood and had several minor roles in film. He first appeared as an extra in the British film "There Goes the Bride" (1932). From there, he hired an agent and had several small parts in films from 1933 to 1935, including a non-speaking role in Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer's "Mutiny on the Bounty". This brought him to wider attention within the film industry and he was spotted by Samuel Goldwyn. Upon the outbreak of the Second World War, Niven returned to Britain and rejoined the army, being recommissioned as a lieutenant.  Niven resumed his acting career after his demobilisation, and was voted the second-most popular British actor in the 1945 Popularity Poll of British film stars. He appeared in "A Matter of Life and Death" (1946), "The Bishop's Wife" (1947), and "Enchantment" (1948), all of which received critical acclaim. Niven later appeared in "The Elusive Pimpernel" (1950), "The Toast of New Orleans" (1950), "Happy Go Lovely" (1951), "Happy Ever After" (1954) and "Carrington V.C." (1955) before scoring a big success as Phileas Fogg in Michael Todd's production of "Around the World in 80 Days" (1956). Niven appeared in nearly a hundred films, and many shows for television. He also began writing books, with considerable commercial success. In 1982 he appeared in Blake Edwards' final "Pink Panther" films "Trail of the Pink Panther" and "Curse of the Pink Panther", reprising his role as Sir Charles Lytton.  James David Graham Niven was born in Belgrave Mansions, London, to William Edward Graham Niven (1878–1915) and his wife, Henrietta Julia (née Degacher) Niven. He was named David after his birth on St. David's Day, 1 March. Niven often claimed that he was born in Kirriemuir, in the Scottish county of Angus in 1909, but his birth certificate shows this was not the case.  Henrietta was of French and British ancestry. She was born in Wales, the daughter of army officer William Degacher (1841–1879) by his marriage to Julia Caroline Smith, the daughter of Lieutenant General James Webber Smith. Niven's grandfather William Degacher was killed in the Battle of Isandlwana (1879), during the Zulu War. Born William Hitchcock, he and his brother Henry had followed the lead of their father, Walter Henry Hitchcock, in assuming their mother's maiden name of Degacher in 1874.  William Niven, David's father, was of Scottish descent; his paternal grandfather, David Graham Niven, (1811–1884) was from St. Martin's, a village in Perthshire. William served in the Berkshire Yeomanry in the First World War and was killed during the Gallipoli campaign on 21 August 1915. He was buried in Green Hill Cemetery, Turkey, in the Special Memorial Section in Plot F. 10.  Niven's mother remarried, to Sir Thomas Comyn-Platt, in London in 1917. Graham Lord, in "Niv: The Authorised Biography of David Niven", suggested that Comyn-Platt and Mrs. Niven had been having an affair for some time before her husband's death, and that Sir Thomas may well have been David Niven's biological father, a supposition which has some support from her children. A reviewer of Lord's book stated that its photographic evidence showing a strong physical resemblance between Niven and Comyn-Platt "would appear to confirm these theories, though photographs can often be misleading."  David Niven had three older siblings:  English private schools at the time of Niven's boyhood were noted for their strict and sometimes brutal discipline. Niven suffered many instances of corporal punishment owing to his inclination for pranks, which finally led to his expulsion from Heatherdown Preparatory School at the age of 10½. This ended his chances for Eton College, a significant blow to his family. After failing to pass the naval entrance exam because of his difficulty with maths, Niven attended Stowe School, a newly created public school led by headmaster J.F. Roxburgh, who was unlike any of Niven's previous headmasters. Thoughtful and kind, he addressed the boys by their first names, allowed them bicycles, and encouraged and nurtured their personal interests. Niven later wrote, "How he did this, I shall never know, but he made every single boy at that school feel that what he said and what he did were of real importance to the headmaster." He attended the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, graduating in 1930 with a commission as a second lieutenant in the British Army.  He did well at Sandhurst, which gave him the "officer and gentleman" bearing that was to be his trademark. He requested assignment to the Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders or the Black Watch (Royal Highland Regiment), then jokingly wrote on the form, as his third choice, "anything but the Highland Light Infantry" (because the HLI wore tartan trews rather than kilts). He was assigned to the HLI. He served with the HLI for two years in Malta and then for a few months in Dover. In Malta, he became friends with Roy Urquhart, future commander of the British 1st Airborne Division.  Niven grew tired of the peacetime army. Though promoted to lieutenant on 1 January 1933, he saw no opportunity for further advancement. His ultimate decision to resign came after a lengthy lecture on machine guns, which was interfering with his plans for dinner with a particularly attractive young lady. At the end of the lecture, the speaker (a major general) asked if there were any questions. Showing the typical rebelliousness of his early years, Niven asked, "Could you tell me the time, sir? I have to catch a train."  After being placed under close-arrest for this act of insubordination, Niven finished a bottle of whisky with the officer who was guarding him: Rhoddy Rose (later Colonel R.L.C. Rose, DSO, MC). With Rose's assistance, Niven was allowed to escape from a first-floor window. He then headed for America. While crossing the Atlantic, Niven resigned his commission by telegram on 6 September 1933. Niven then moved to New York City, where he began an unsuccessful career in whisky sales, after which he had a stint in horse rodeo promotion in Atlantic City. After detours to Bermuda and Cuba, he arrived in Hollywood in 1934.  When Niven presented himself at Central Casting, he learned that he needed a work permit to reside and work in the United States. This meant that Niven had to leave the US, so he went to Mexico, where he worked as a "gun-man", cleaning and polishing the rifles of visiting American hunters. He received his resident alien visa from the American consulate when his birth certificate arrived from Britain. He returned to the US and was accepted by Central Casting as "Anglo-Saxon Type No. 2,008."  Among the films he can be glimpsed in were "Barbary Coast" (1935) and "Mutiny on the Bounty" (1935). He had a small role in "A Feather in Her Hat" (1935) at Columbia and back to Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer for a bit role, billed as David Nivens in Rose-Marie. (1936)  Niven's role in "Mutiny on the Bounty" brought him to the attention of independent film producer Samuel Goldwyn, who signed him to a contract and established his career.  For Goldwyn, Niven had a small role in "Splendor" (1935). He was loaned to MGM for a small part in "Rose Marie" (1936) then had a larger one in "Palm Springs" (1936) at Paramount.  His first sizeable part for Goldwyn came in "Dodsworth" (1936), playing a man who flirts with Ruth Chatterton. He was loaned to 20th Century Fox to play Bertie Wooster in "Thank You, Jeeves!" (1936), then had a good part as a soldier in "The Charge of the Light Brigade" (1936) at Warners, an Imperial adventure film starring his one-time housemate Errol Flynn.  Niven was fourth billed in "Beloved Enemy" (1936) for Goldwyn, supporting Merle Oberon with whom he became romantically involved. Universal used him in "We Have Our Moments" (1937) then he had another good support part in David O. Selznick's "The Prisoner of Zenda" (1937).  Fox gave him the lead in a B picture, "Dinner at the Ritz" (1938) and he had a support part in "Bluebeard's Eighth Wife" (1938) directed by Ernst Lubitsch at Paramount. Niven was one of the four heroes in John Ford's "Four Men and a Prayer" (1938) at Fox. He remained at that studio to play a fake love interest in "Three Blind Mice" (1938).  Niven joined what became known as the Hollywood Raj, a group of British actors in Hollywood which included Rex Harrison, Boris Karloff, Stan Laurel, Basil Rathbone, Ronald Colman, Leslie Howard, and C. Aubrey Smith. According to his autobiography, Errol Flynn and he were firm friends and rented Rosalind Russell's house at 601 North Linden Drive as a bachelor pad.  Niven graduated to star parts in "A" films with "The Dawn Patrol" (1938) remake at Warners; he was billed after Errol Flynn and Basil Rathbone but it was a leading role and the film did excellent business. Niven was reluctant to take a support part in "Wuthering Heights" (1939) for Goldwyn, but eventually relented and the film was a big success.  RKO borrowed him to play Ginger Rogers' leading man in the romantic comedy, "Bachelor Mother" (1939), which was a big hit. Goldwyn used him to support Gary Cooper in an adventure tale "The Real Glory" (1939), and Walter Wanger cast him opposite Loretta Young in "Eternally Yours" (1939). Goldwyn finally gave Niven a lead part, the title role as the eponymous gentleman safe-cracker in "Raffles" (1939).  After Britain declared war on Germany in 1939, Niven returned home and rejoined the British Army. He was alone among British stars in Hollywood in doing so; the British Embassy advising most actors to stay.  Niven was recommissioned as a lieutenant into the Rifle Brigade (Prince Consort's Own) on 25 February 1940, and was assigned to a motor training battalion. He wanted something more exciting, however, and transferred into the Commandos. He was assigned to a training base at Inverailort House in the Western Highlands. Niven later claimed credit for bringing future Major General Sir Robert E. Laycock to the Commandos. Niven commanded "A" Squadron GHQ Liaison Regiment, better known as "Phantom". He worked with the Army Film Unit.  He acted in two films made during the war, "The First of the Few" (1942), directed by Leslie Howard, and "The Way Ahead" (1944), directed by Carol Reed. Both were made with a view to winning support for the British war effort, especially in the United States. Niven's Film Unit work included a small part in the deception operation that used minor actor M.E. Clifton James to impersonate General Sir Bernard Montgomery. During his work with the Film Unit, Peter Ustinov, though one of the script-writers, had to pose as Niven's batman. (Ustinov also plaued a large supporting role as a Frenchman in "The Way Ahead.") Niven explained in his autobiography that there was no military way that he, as a lieutenant-colonel, and Ustinov, who was only a private, could associate, other than as an officer and his subordinate, hence their strange "act". Ustinov later appeared with Niven in "Death on the Nile" (1978).  Niven took part in the Allied invasion of Normandy in June 1944, although he was sent to France several days after D-Day. He served in the "Phantom Signals Unit," which located and reported enemy positions, and kept rear commanders informed on changing battle lines. Niven was posted at one time to Chilham in Kent. He remained close-mouthed about the war, despite public interest in celebrities in combat and a reputation for storytelling. He once said: I will, however, tell you just one thing about the war, my first story and my last. I was asked by some American friends to search out the grave of their son near Bastogne.<br> I found it where they told me I would, but it was among 27,000 others, and I told myself that here, Niven, were 27,000 reasons why you should keep your mouth shut after the war. Niven had particular scorn for those newspaper columnists covering the war who typed out self-glorifying and excessively florid prose about their meagre wartime experiences. Niven stated, "Anyone who says a bullet sings past, hums past, flies, pings, or whines past, has never heard one—they go "crack"!" He gave a few details of his war experience in his autobiography, "The Moon's a Balloon:" his private conversations with Winston Churchill, the bombing of London, and what it was like entering Germany with the occupation forces. Niven first met Churchill at a dinner party in February 1940. Churchill singled him out from the crowd and stated, "Young man, you did a fine thing to give up your film career to fight for your country. Mark you, had you not done so − it would have been despicable."  A few stories have surfaced. About to lead his men into action, Niven eased their nervousness by telling them, "Look, you chaps only have to do this once. But I'll have to do it all over again in Hollywood with Errol Flynn!" Asked by suspicious American sentries during the Battle of the Bulge who had won the World Series in 1943, he answered, "Haven't the foggiest idea, but I did co-star with Ginger Rogers in "Bachelor Mother"!" On another occasion, asked how he felt about serving with the British Army in Europe, he allegedly said, "Well on the whole, I would rather be tickling Ginger Rogers' tits."  Niven ended the war as a lieutenant-colonel. On his return to Hollywood after the war, he received the Legion of Merit, an American military decoration. Presented by Eisenhower himself, it honoured Niven's work in setting up the BBC Allied Expeditionary Forces Programme, a radio news and entertainment station for the Allied forces.  Niven resumed his career while still in England, playing the lead in "A Matter of Life and Death" (1946), from the team of Powell and Pressburger. The movie was critically acclaimed, popular in England and the recipient of the first Royal Film Performance.  Niven returned to Hollywood, and encountered tragedy when his first wife died after falling down a set of stairs accidentally at a party. Goldwyn loaned him to play Aaron Burr in "Magnificent Doll" (1946) opposite Ginger Rogers, then to Paramount for "The Perfect Marriage" (1947) with Loretta Young and Enterprise Productions for "The Other Love" (1947).  For Goldwyn he supported Cary Grant and Young in "The Bishop's Wife" (1947) with Cary Grant. He returned to England when Goldwyn loaned him to Alexander Korda to play the title role in "Bonnie Prince Charlie" (1948), a notorious box office flop.  Back in Hollywood, Niven was in Goldwyn's "Enchantment" (1948). At Warner Bros he was in a comedy "A Kiss in the Dark" (1948) then he appeared opposite Shirley Temple in the comedy "A Kiss for Corliss" (1949). None of these films were successful at the box office and Niven's career was struggling.  He returned to Britain to play the title role in "The Elusive Pimpernel" (1950) from Powell and Pressberger, which was to have been financed by Korda and Goldwyn. Goldwyn pulled out, and the film did not appear in the US for three years. Niven had a long, complex relationship with Goldwyn, who gave him his first start, but the dispute over "The Elusive Pimpernel" and Niven's demands for more money led to a long estrangement between the two in the 1950s.  Niven struggled for a while to recapture his former position. He supported Mario Lanza in a musical at MGM, "The Toast of New Orleans" (1950). He then went to England and appeared in a musical with Vera-Ellen, "Happy Go Lovely" (1951); it was little seen in the US but was a big hit in Britain.  He had a support role in MGM's "Soldiers Three" (1951) similar to those early in his career. Niven had a far better part in the British war film, "Appointment with Venus" (1952) which was popular in England. "The Lady Says No" (1952) was a poorly received American comedy.  Niven decided to try Broadway, appearing opposite Gloria Swanson in "Nina" (1951–52). The play only ran for 45 performances but it was seen by Otto Preminger who decided to cast Niven in the film version of the play "The Moon Is Blue" (1953). As preparation, Preminger, who had directed the play in New York, insisted that Niven appear on stage in the West Coast run. "The Moon Is Blue", a sex comedy, became notorious when it was released without a Production Code Seal of Approval; it was a big hit and Niven won a Golden Globe Award for his role.  Niven also became heavily involved in American TV as a partner in Four Star Television, a company he established with Dick Powell and Charles Boyer. It ended up producing a considerable number of shows, several in which Niven appeared.  Niven's next few films were made in England: "The Love Lottery" (1954), a comedy; "Carrington V.C." (1954), a drama which earned Niven a BAFTA nomination for Best Actor; "Happy Ever After" (1954), a comedy with Yvonne de Carlo which was hugely popular in Britain.  In Hollywood he had thankless role as the villain in an MGM swashbuckler "The King's Thief" (1955). He had a better part in "The Birds and the Bees" (1956), playing a conman, and in the British "The Silken Affair" (1956).  Niven's professional fortunes were completely restored when cast as Phileas Fogg in "Around the World in 80 Days" (1956), a huge hit at the box office.  He followed it with "Oh, Men! Oh, Women!" (1957); "The Little Hut" (1957), from the writer of "The Moon is Blue" and a success at the box office; "My Man Godfrey" (1957), a screwball comedy; and "Bonjour Tristesse" (1958), for Preminger.  Niven worked in television. He appeared several times on various short-drama shows, and was one of the "four stars" of the dramatic anthology series "Four Star Playhouse", appearing in 33 episodes. The show was produced by Four Star Television, which was co-owned and founded by Niven, Ida Lupino, Dick Powell and Charles Boyer. The show ended in 1955, but Four Star TV became a highly successful TV production company.   He won the 1958 Academy Award for Best Actor for his role as Major Pollock in "Separate Tables", his only nomination for an Oscar. Appearing on-screen for only 23 minutes in the film, this was the briefest performance ever to win a Best Actor Oscar, until Anthony Hopkins win for his appearance in the 1991 film "The Silence of the Lambs", which is a little over 16 minutes. He was also a co-host of the 30th, 31st, and 46th Academy Awards ceremonies. After Niven had won the Academy Award, Goldwyn called with an invitation to his home. In Goldwyn's drawing room, Niven noticed a picture of himself in uniform which he had sent to Goldwyn from Britain during the Second World War. In happier times with Goldwyn, he had observed this same picture sitting on Goldwyn's piano. Now years later, the picture was still in exactly the same spot. As he was looking at the picture, Goldwyn's wife Frances said, "Sam never took it down."  With an Academy Award to his credit, Niven's career continued to thrive. In 1959, he became the host of his own TV drama series, "The David Niven Show", which ran for 13 episodes that summer.  He played the lead in some comedies: "Ask Any Girl" (1959), with Shirley MacLaine; "Happy Anniversary" (1959) with Mitzi Gaynor; and "Please Don't Eat the Daisies" (1960) with Doris Day, a big hit.  Even more popular was the action film "The Guns of Navarone" (1961). This seemed to lead to him being cast in war and/or action movies: "The Captive City" (1962); "The Best of Enemies" (1962); "Guns of Darkness" (1962); "55 Days at Peking" (1963) with Charlton Heston.  Niven returned to comedy with "The Pink Panther" (1963), another huge success at the box office. Less so was the comedy "Bedtime Story" (1964) with Marlon Brando.  In 1964, Boyer and he appeared in the Four Star series "The Rogues". Niven played Alexander 'Alec' Fleming, one of a family of retired con-artists who now fleece villains in the interests of justice. This was his only recurring role on television. "The Rogues" ran for only one season, but won a Golden Globe award.  In 1965, he made two films for MGM: "Lady L", supporting Paul Newman and Sophia Loren, and "Where the Spies Are", as a doctor turned secret agent - MGM hoped it would lead to a series but this did not happen. After a horror film "Eye of the Devil" (1966) Niven appeared as James Bond 007 in "Casino Royale" (1967). Niven had been Bond creator Ian Fleming's first choice to play Bond in "Dr. No". "Casino Royale" co-producer Charles K. Feldman said later that Fleming had written the book with Niven in mind, and therefore had sent a copy to Niven. Niven was the only James Bond actor mentioned by name in the text of a Fleming novel. In chapter 14 of "You Only Live Twice", the pearl diver Kissy Suzuki refers to Niven as "the only man she liked in Hollywood", and the only person who "treated her honourably" there.  Niven made some popular comedies, "Prudence and the Pill" (1968) and "The Impossible Years" (1968). Less widely seen was "The Extraordinary Seaman" (1969). "The Brain" (1969), a French comedy with Bourvil and Jean Paul Belmondo was the most popular film at the French box office in 1969 but was not widely seen in English speaking countries.  He did a war drama "Before Winter Comes" (1969) then returned to comedy in "The Statue" (1971).  Niven was in demand throughout the last decade of his life: "King, Queen, Knave" (1972); "Vampira" (1974); "Paper Tiger" (1975); "No Deposit, No Return" (1976), a Disney comedy; "Murder by Death" (1976), one of several stars in a popular comedy; "Candleshoe" (1977), again for Disney; "Death on the Nile" (1978), one of many stars and another hit; "A Nightingale Sang in Berkeley Square" (1979); "Escape to Athena" (1979), produced by his son; "Rough Cut" (1980), supporting Burt Reynolds; and "The Sea Wolves" (1980), a wartime adventure movie.  While Niven was co-hosting the 46th Annual Oscars ceremony, a naked man appeared behind him, "streaking" across the stage. Niven responded "Isn't it fascinating to think that probably the only laugh that man will ever get in his life is by stripping off and showing his shortcomings?"  In 1974, he hosted "David Niven's World" for London Weekend Television, which profiled contemporary adventurers such as hang gliders, motorcyclists, and mountain climbers: it ran for 21 episodes. In 1975, he narrated "The Remarkable Rocket", a short animation based on a story by Oscar Wilde.  His last sizeable film part was in "Better Late Than Never" (1983). In July 1982, Blake Edwards brought Niven back for cameo appearances in two final "Pink Panther" films ("Trail of the Pink Panther" and "Curse of the Pink Panther"), reprising his role as Sir Charles Lytton. By this time, Niven was having serious health problems. When the raw footage was reviewed, his voice was inaudible, and his lines had to be dubbed by Rich Little. Niven only learned of it from a newspaper report. This was his last film appearance.   Niven wrote four books. The first, "Round the Rugged Rocks", (published simultaneously in the US under the title "Once Over Lightly") was a novel that appeared in 1951 and was forgotten almost at once. In 1971, he published his autobiography, "The Moon's a Balloon", which was well received, selling over five million copies. He followed this with "Bring On the Empty Horses" in 1975, a collection of entertaining reminiscences from Hollywood's "Golden Age" in the 1930s and '40s. It now appears that Niven recounted many incidents from a first-person perspective that actually happened to other people, especially Cary Grant, which he borrowed and embroidered. In 1981 Niven published a second and much more successful novel, "Go Slowly, Come Back Quickly", which was set during and after the Second World War, and which drew on his experiences during the war and in Hollywood. He was working on a third novel at the time of his death.  While on leave in 1940, Niven met Primula "Primmie" Susan Rollo (18 February 1918, London – 21 May 1946), the daughter of London lawyer William H.C. Rollo. After a whirlwind romance, they married on 16 September. A son, David, Jr., was born in December 1942 and a second son, James Graham Niven, on 6 November 1945. Primmie died at age 28 only six weeks after the family moved to the US. She fractured her skull in an accidental fall in the Beverly Hills, California home of Tyrone Power, while playing a game of hide-and-seek. She had walked through a door believing it to be a closet, but instead, it led to a stone staircase to the basement.  In 1948, Niven met Hjördis Paulina Tersmeden (née Genberg, 1919–1997), a divorced Swedish fashion model. He recounted their meeting:I had never seen anything so beautiful in my life—tall, slim, auburn hair, up-tilted nose, lovely mouth and the most enormous grey eyes I had ever seen. It really happened the way it does when written by the worst lady novelists ... I goggled. I had difficulty swallowing and had champagne in my knees. In New York, Niven and Hjördis were next-door neighbours with Audrey Hepburn, who made her début on Broadway that season. In 1960, while filming "Please Don't Eat the Daisies" with Doris Day, Niven and Hjördis separated for a few weeks, but later reconciled.  In 1960, Niven moved to Château-d'Œx near Gstaad in Switzerland for financial reasons, near to close friends in the country including Deborah Kerr, Peter Ustinov, and Noël Coward. Niven's status as a tax exile in Switzerland is believed to have been one of the reasons why he never received a British honour. Niven divided his time in the 1960s and 1970s between Château-d'Œx and Cap Ferrat on the Côte d'Azur in the south of France.  A 2009 biography of Niven contained assertions, based on information from his widow and a good friend of Niven's, that he had had an affair with Princess Margaret, 20 years his junior.  In 1980, Niven began experiencing fatigue, muscle weakness, and a warble in his voice. His 1981 interviews on the talk shows of Michael Parkinson and Merv Griffin alarmed family and friends; viewers wondered if Niven had either been drinking or suffered a stroke. He blamed his slightly slurred voice on the shooting schedule on the film he had been making, "Better Late Than Never". He was diagnosed with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS, or "Lou Gehrig's disease" in the US, or "motor neurone disease" (MND) in the UK), later that year. His final appearance in Hollywood was hosting the 1981 American Film Institute tribute to Fred Astaire.  In February 1983, using a false name to avoid publicity, Niven was hospitalised for 10 days, ostensibly for a digestive problem. Afterwards, he returned to his chalet at Château-d'Œx. His condition continued to decline, but he refused to return to the hospital, and his family supported his decision. He died at his chalet from ALS on 29 July 1983 aged 73, the same day as his "The Prisoner of Zenda" and "A Matter of Life and Death" co-star Raymond Massey. He was survived by his four children and his second wife. Niven is buried in Château-d'Œx cemetery, Switzerland.  A Thanksgiving service for Niven was held at St Martin-in-the-Fields, London, on 27 October 1983. The congregation of 1,200 included Prince Michael of Kent, Margaret, Duchess of Argyll, Sir John Mills, Sir Richard Attenborough, Trevor Howard, Sir David Frost, Joanna Lumley, Douglas Fairbanks, Jr. and Lord Olivier.  Biographer Graham Lord wrote, "the biggest wreath, worthy of a Mafia Godfather's funeral, was delivered from the porters at London's Heathrow Airport, along with a card that read: 'To the finest gentleman who ever walked through these halls. He made a porter feel like a king.'"  In 1985, Niven was included in a series of British postage stamps, along with Sir Alfred Hitchcock, Sir Charlie Chaplin, Peter Sellers and Vivien Leigh, to commemorate "British Film Year"