 Ei-ichi Negishi  Negishi was born in Hsinking, the capital of Manchukuo (now Changchun, China) 1935, following the transfer of his father who worked at the South Manchuria Railway in 1936, he moved to Harbin and spent his boyhood. From 1943 to 1945, Negishi family moved to Incheon and Kyongsong Prefecture (now Seoul), both in Korea under Japanese rule. After World War II ended, they moved back to Japan in November 1945. Negishi graduated from the University of Tokyo in 1958 and did his internship at Teijin. He went on to study in the United States and obtained his PhD from the University of Pennsylvania in 1963 under the supervision of professor Allan R. Day.  After obtaining PhD, Negishi decided to become an academic researcher. Although he was hoping to work at a Japanese university, but he could not find any workplace. In 1966 he handed off resignation of Teijin and he became a postdoctoral fellow at Purdue University. His advisor is Nobel laureate Herbert C. Brown.  In 1968, he became assistant professor. In 1972, he went on to become associate professor at Syracuse University where (formerly retired from Teijin), in 1979, he was promoted to professor, also he went back to Purdue University.  He discovered Negishi coupling which condenses organic zinc compound and organic halide under palladium or nickel catalyst to obtain C-C bonded product. With this achievement, he was awarded the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 2010. He commented that "I keep thinking for 50 years, dreaming has come true," and "that young Japanese people should also come overseas." Negishi have also reported that organoaluminum compounds and organic zirconium compounds can be used for cross-coupling. He has not obtained a patent for this coupling technology, his reason is as follows: "If we do not obtain a patent, we thought that everyone could use our results easily, and made it half conscious".  In addition, Zr(CH) obtained by reducing zirconocene dichloride is also called Negishi reagent and is used for the synthesis of polysubstituted benzene.  In 2011, he was awarded the honorary doctor of science degree from the University of Pennsylvania