 Forest Whitaker  Forest Steven Whitaker III (born July 15, 1961) is an American actor, producer, and director.  Whitaker has earned a reputation for intensive character study work for films such as "Bird", "The Crying Game", "Platoon", "", "The Butler", "Arrival" and "" as Saw Gerrera.  For his performance as Ugandan dictator Idi Amin in the 2006 film "The Last King of Scotland", Whitaker won the Academy Award, British Academy Film Award, Golden Globe Award, National Board of Review Award, Screen Actors Guild Award, and various critics groups awards.  Whitaker was born in Longview, Texas on July 15, 1961, the son of Laura Francis ("née" Smith), a special education teacher who put herself through college and earned two master's degrees while raising her children, and Forest Steven Jr., an insurance salesman. His mother had Akan ancestry, while his father was of Igbo descent. When Whitaker was four, his family moved to Carson, California. Whitaker has two younger brothers, Kenn (an actor) and Damon, and an older sister, Deborah. His first role as an actor was the lead in Dylan Thomas' play "Under Milk Wood".  Whitaker attended Palisades Charter High School and played on the football team and sang in the choir, graduating in 1979. Whitaker entered California State Polytechnic University, Pomona on a football scholarship, but a back injury made him change his major to music (singing). He toured England with the Cal Poly Chamber Singers in 1980. While still at Cal Poly, he briefly changed his major to drama. He was accepted to the Music Conservatory at the University of Southern California to study opera as a tenor, and subsequently was accepted into the University's Drama Conservatory. He graduated from USC with a Bachelor of Fine Arts degree in Acting in 1982. He also earned a scholarship to the Berkeley, California branch of the Drama Studio London. Whitaker was pursuing a degree in ""The Core of Conflict: Studies in Peace and Reconciliation"" at New York University's Gallatin School of Individualized Study in 2004.  Whitaker has a long history of working with well-regarded film directors and actors. In his first onscreen performance of note, he had a supporting role playing a high school football player in the 1982 film version of Cameron Crowe's coming-of-age teen-retrospective "Fast Times at Ridgemont High". In 1986, he appeared in Martin Scorsese's "The Color of Money" and Oliver Stone's "Platoon". The following year, he co-starred in the comedy "Good Morning, Vietnam". In 1988, Whitaker appeared in the film "Bloodsport" and had his first lead role starring as musician Charlie "Bird" Parker in Clint Eastwood's "Bird". To prepare himself for the part, he sequestered himself in a loft with only a bed, couch, and saxophone, having also conducted extensive research and taken alto sax lessons. His performance, which has been called "transcendent", earned him the Best Actor award at the 1988 Cannes Film Festival and a Golden Globe nomination.  Whitaker continued to work with a number of well-known directors throughout the 1990s. He starred in the 1990 film "Downtown" and was cast in the pivotal role of Jody, a captive British soldier in the 1992 film "The Crying Game", for which he used an English accent. Todd McCarthy of "Variety" described Whitaker's performance as "big-hearted", "hugely emotional", and "simply terrific". In 1994, he was a member of the cast that won the first ever National Board of Review Award for Best Acting by an Ensemble for Robert Altman's film, "Prêt-à-Porter". He gave a "characteristically emotional performance" in Wayne Wang and Paul Auster's 1995 film, "Smoke". In 1996, he played a role of a good-natured man in "Phenomenon", alongside John Travolta and Robert Duvall, which earned him a Blockbuster Entertainment Award for Favorite Supporting Actor – Drama.  Whitaker played a serene, pigeon-raising, bushido-following, mob hit man in "", a 1999 film written and directed by Jim Jarmusch. Many consider this to have been a "definitive role" for Whitaker. In a manner similar to his preparation for "Bird", he again immersed himself in his character's world—he studied Eastern philosophy and meditated for long hours "to hone his inner spiritual hitman." Jarmusch has told interviewers that he developed the title character with Whitaker in mind; "The New York Times" review of the film observed that "[I]t's hard to think of another actor who could play a cold-blooded killer with such warmth and humanity."  Whitaker next appeared in what has been called one of the worst films ever made, the 2000 production of "Battlefield Earth", based on the novel of the same name by L. Ron Hubbard. The film was widely criticized as a notorious commercial and critical disaster. However, Whitaker's performance was lauded by the film's director, Roger Christian, who commented that, "Everybody's going to be very surprised" by Whitaker, who "found this huge voice and laugh." "Battlefield Earth" won seven Razzie Awards; Whitaker was nominated for Worst Supporting Actor, but lost to his co-star, Barry Pepper. Whitaker later expressed his regret for participating in the film. In 2001, Whitaker had a small, uncredited role in the Wong Kar-wai-directed "The Follow", one of five short films produced by BMW that year to promote its cars. He co-starred in Joel Schumacher's 2002 thriller, "Phone Booth", with Kiefer Sutherland and Colin Farrell. That year, he also co-starred with Jodie Foster in "Panic Room". His performance as the film's "bad guy" was described as "a subtle chemistry of aggression and empathy."  Whitaker's 2006 portrayal of Idi Amin in the film "The Last King of Scotland" earned him positive reviews by critics as well as multiple awards and honors. To portray the dictator, Whitaker gained 50 pounds, learned to play the accordion, and immersed himself in research. He read books about Amin, watched news and documentary footage featuring Amin, and spent time in Uganda meeting with Amin's friends, relatives, generals, and victims; he also learned Swahili and mastered Amin's East African accent. His performance earned him the Academy Award for Best Actor, making him the fourth African-American actor in history to do so, joining the ranks of Sidney Poitier, Denzel Washington, and Jamie Foxx. For that same role, he was also recognized with the British Academy Film Award, Golden Globe Award, National Board of Review Award, Screen Actors Guild Award, and accolades from the Broadcast Film Critics Association, London Film Critics’ Circle Award, Los Angeles Film Critics Association, National Society of Film Critics, and New York Film Critics Circle among others.  In 2007, Whitaker played Dr. James Farmer Sr. in "The Great Debaters", for which he received an Image Award nomination for Outstanding Supporting Actor. In 2008, Whitaker appeared in three films, first as a business man known only as Happiness, who likes butterflies, in the film "The Air I Breathe". He also portrayed a rogue police captain in "Street Kings", and a heroic tourist in "Vantage Point".  In 2013, after a small career slump where he starred in a few straight-to-video films, Whitaker has enjoyed a career resurgence, having played the lead role in "Lee Daniels' The Butler", which has become one of his greatest critical and commercial successes to date. Whitaker also starred in the film "Black Nativity" and co-starred in 2013's "The Last Stand", playing an FBI agent chasing an escaped drug cartel leader.  Whitaker played Saw Gerrera in the 2016 film "Rogue One: A Star Wars Story".  After completing several films in the early 1980s, Whitaker gained additional roles in multiple television shows. On the series, "Diff'rent Strokes", he played a bully in the 1985 episode "Bully for Arnold". That same year, Whitaker also played the part of a comic book salesman in the "Amazing Stories" episode "Gather Ye Acorns". He appeared in the first and second parts of "North and South" in 1985 and 1986. Throughout the 1990s, Whitaker mainly had roles in television films which aired on HBO, including "Criminal Justice", "The Enemy Within", and "Witness Protection".  From 2002 to 2003, Whitaker was the host and narrator of 44 new episodes of the Rod Serling classic, "The Twilight Zone", which lasted one season on UPN. After working in several film roles, he returned to television in 2006 when he joined the cast of FX's police serial "The Shield", as Lieutenant Jon Kavanaugh, who was determined to prove that the lead character, Vic Mackey, is a dirty cop. As opposed to his previous character work, Whitaker stated that he merely had to draw on his childhood years growing up in South Central Los Angeles for the role. He received rave reviews for his performance—"Variety" called it a "crackling-good guest stint"—and he reprised the role in the show's 2007 season.  In the fall of 2006, Whitaker started a multi-episode story arc on "ER" as Curtis Ames, a man who comes into the ER with a cough, but quickly faces the long-term consequences of a paralyzing stroke; he sues, then takes out his anger on Dr. Luka Kovač, who he blames for the strokes. Whitaker received a Primetime Emmy Award nomination for his performance in the series. Also in 2006, Whitaker appeared in T.I.'s music video "Live in the Sky" alongside Jamie Foxx.  Whitaker was cast in the "Criminal Minds" spin-off, "", that was subsequently cancelled by CBS on May 17, 2011.  In December 2016, it was announced that Whitaker would reprise his role as Saw Gerrera from "Rogue One" for the "Star Wars Rebels" animated series.  Whitaker made his Broadway debut in 2016 in a revival of Eugene O'Neill's play "Hughie" at the Booth Theatre, directed by Michael Grandage.  Whitaker branched out into producing and directing in the 1990s. He co-produced and co-starred in "A Rage in Harlem" in 1991. He made his directorial debut with a grim film about inner-city gun violence, "Strapped", for HBO in 1993. In 1995, he directed his first theatrical feature, "Waiting to Exhale", which was based on the Terry McMillan novel of the same name. Roger Ebert observed that the tone of the film resembled Whitaker's own acting style: "measured, serene, confident." Whitaker also directed co-star Whitney Houston's music video of the movie's theme song, "Exhale (Shoop Shoop)".  Whitaker continued his directing career with the 1998 romantic comedy, "Hope Floats", starring Sandra Bullock and Harry Connick, Jr. He directed Katie Holmes in the romantic comedy, "First Daughter" in 2004 while also serving as executive producer; he had previously co-starred with Holmes in "Phone Booth" in 2002. He had previously gained experience as the executive producer of several made-for-television movies, most notably the 2002 Emmy-award-winning "Door to Door", starring William H. Macy.  He produced these projects through his production company, Spirit Dance Entertainment, which he shut down in 2005 to concentrate on his acting career.  For Significant Productions Whitaker and his partner Nina Yang Bongiovi produced the film "Fruitvale Station", which won the Grand Jury Prize and the Audience Award for U.S. dramatic film at the 2013 Sundance Film Festival, as well as "Repentance" (2014), "Dope" (2015) and the upcoming "Sorry to Bother You". Significant also produced a documentary shot in the hospice at Angola prison in Louisiana, 'Serving Life'(2011) for Oprah Winfrey as the first commission for OWN and Oprah's Doc Club.  Whitaker plays an active role as co-chair of JuntoBox Films since his initial involvement as co-chair with the collaborative film studio starting in March 2012. JuntoBox was developed as a social-media platform for filmmakers and fans to share ideas to create films and then collaborate to make them. Since Whitaker joined as co-chair, five projects have been greenlit for production.  In addition to the numerous awards Whitaker won for his performance in "The Last King of Scotland", he has also received several other honors. In September 2006, the 10th Annual Hollywood Film Festival presented him with its "Hollywood Actor of the Year Award," calling him "one of Hollywood's most accomplished actors." He was honored at the Santa Barbara International Film Festival 2007, where he received the American Riviera Award.  Previously, in 2005, the Deauville (France) Festival of American Film paid tribute to him. On April 16, 2007, Whitaker was the recipient of the 2,335th star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame for his contributions to the motion pictures industry at 6801 Hollywood Boulevard. He received the honorary degree of Doctor of Humane Letters from Xavier University of Louisiana in 2009 at the 82nd Commencement Ceremony. He received the honorary degree of Doctor of Humane Letters from California State University, Dominguez Hills on May 16, 2015.  Whitaker, who is a vegetarian, recorded a public service announcement with his daughter, True, promoting vegetarianism on behalf of People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA). He is also a supporter and public advocate for Hope North, a boarding school and vocational training center in northern Uganda for escaped child soldiers, orphans, and other young victims of the country's civil war. Whitaker founded the Whitaker Peace & Development Initiative (WPDI), a non-governmental organization in 2012. WPDI implements peace-building programs in conflict affected communities in the different regions of the world, including Africa, Latin America and the United States.  In politics, Whitaker supported and spoke on behalf of Senator Barack Obama in his 2008 presidential campaign. On April 6, 2009, he was given a chieftaincy title in Imo State, Nigeria. Whitaker, who was named a chief among the Igbo community of Nkwerre, was given the title "Nwannedinamba" of Nkwerre, which means "A Brother in a Foreign Land".  Whitaker was inducted as a UNESCO Goodwill Ambassador for Peace and Reconciliation, in a ceremony at UNESCO headquarters on June 21, 2011. As Goodwill Ambassador, Whitaker works with UNESCO to support and develop initiatives that empower youths and keep them from entering or remaining in cycles of violence. At the induction ceremony, U.S. Ambassador to UNESCO David Killion described Whitaker as a "perfect choice as a Goodwill Ambassador... he has exemplified compassion in every area of his life, with humility and grace. He does this because it's the right thing to do."  In 2010, Whitaker received the Artist Citizen of the World Award (France).  Whitaker co-founded the International Institute for Peace (IIP) at Rutgers University in Newark, New Jersey. Launched during the international Newark Peace Education Summit, IIP's mission is to develop programs and strategic partnerships to address issues such as increasing citizen security through community-building; the role of women and spiritual and religious leaders in peacebuilding; the impact of climate change; and the reduction of poverty. IIP operates under the auspices of UNESCO.  In 1996, Whitaker married actress Keisha Nash, whom he met on the set of "Blown Away". They have four children: two daughters together (Sonnet and True), and his son (Ocean) and her daughter (Autumn) from their previous relationships.  Whitaker studies yoga and has a black belt in kenpō. He also trains in arnis under Dan Inosanto.  Whitaker's left eye ptosis has been called "intriguing" by some critics and gives him "a lazy, contemplative look". Whitaker has explained that the condition is hereditary and that he has considered having surgery to correct it, not for cosmetic reasons but because it affects his visio