 Frans Eemil Sillanpää  Frans Eemil Sillanpää () (16 September 1888 – 3 June 1964) was one of the most famous Finnish writers and in 1939 became the first Finnish writer to be awarded the Nobel Prize for literature "for his deep understanding of his country's peasantry and the exquisite art with which he has portrayed their way of life and their relationship with Nature".  Frans Eemil Sillanpää was born into a peasant farming family in Hämeenkyrö. Although his parents were poor, they managed to send him to school in Tampere. At school Sillanpää was a good student and with aid of his benefactor Henrik Liljeroos he entered University of Helsinki in 1908 to study medicine. Here his acquaintances included the painters Eero Järnefelt and Pekka Halonen, composer Jean Sibelius and author Juhani Aho.  Five years later, in 1913 Sillanpää moved from Helsinki to his old home village and devoted himself to writing. In 1914 Sillanpää wrote articles for the newspaper "Uusi Suometar". In 1916 Sillanpää married Sigrid Maria Salomäki, whom he had met in 1914.   By principle, Sillanpää was against all forms of violence and believed in scientific optimism. In his work he portrayed rural people living united with the land.  Novel "Hurskas kurjuus" (1919) depicted reasons for Finnish Civil War and despite objectivity was controversial at the time.   He won international fame for his novel "Nuorena nukkunut" (English translation published with the name "The Maid Silja") in 1931.  In 1939, he was awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature "for his deep understanding of his country's peasantry and the exquisite art with which he has portrayed their way of life and their relationship with Nature." A few days after receiving the prize talks between Finland and Soviet Union broke down and Winter War began. Sillanpää donated the golden medal to be melted for funds to aid in war effort.  Before Winter War, Sillanpää wrote the lyrics for what is known as "Sillanpään marssilaulu" to lift spirits when his eldest son Esko was partaking in military practices at Karelian Isthmus.  In 1939 his wife Sigrid died of pneumonia leaving eight children with Sillanpää. Some time after, Sillanpää married his secretary Anna von Hertzen and traveled to Stockholm to receive the Nobel prize.  In 1941 Sillanpää divorced his wife Anna. His alcoholism and other ailments needed hospital treatment. In 1943 he returned to public life as a bearded old 'Grandpa Sillanpää'. His radio appearances, especially tradition of talking on Christmas-Eve from 1945 to 1963 became very popular.  The asteroid 1446 Sillanpää, discovered on January 26, 1938 by the renowned Finnish astronomer and physicist Yrjö Väisälä, was named after him.  Sillanpää died on 3 June 1964 in Helsinki aged 75.   Various his works have been made into film