<doc id="63390" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63390" title="Meryl Streep">
Meryl Streep

Mary Louise Streep (born June 22, 1949), known professionally as Meryl Streep, is an American actress. Cited in the media as the "best actress of her generation", Streep is particularly known for her versatility and accent adaptation. Nominated for a record 21 Academy Awards, she has won three. Streep has also received 31 Golden Globe nominations, winning eight — more nominations and competitive wins than any other actor.

Streep made her stage debut in "Trelawny of the Wells" in 1975. In 1976, she received a Tony Award nomination for Best Featured Actress in a Play for "27 Wagons Full of Cotton". In 1977, she made her screen debut in the television film "The Deadliest Season", and also made her film debut in "Julia". In 1978, she won an Emmy Award for her role in the mini-series "Holocaust", and received her first Academy Award nomination for "The Deer Hunter". Streep went on to win Best Supporting Actress for "Kramer vs. Kramer" (1979), and Best Actress for "Sophie's Choice" (1982) and "The Iron Lady" (2011).

Streep's other Oscar-nominated roles were in "The French Lieutenant's Woman" (1981), "Silkwood" (1983), "Out of Africa" (1985), "Ironweed" (1987), "Evil Angels" (1988), "Postcards from the Edge" (1990), "The Bridges of Madison County" (1995), "One True Thing" (1998), "Music of the Heart" (1999), "Adaptation" (2002), "The Devil Wears Prada" (2006), "Doubt" (2008), "Julie & Julia" (2009), "" (2013), "Into the Woods" (2014), "Florence Foster Jenkins" (2016), and "The Post" (2017). She returned to the stage for the first time in over 20 years in The Public Theater's 2001 revival of "The Seagull", and won a second Emmy Award and a Golden Globe in 2004 for the HBO mini-series "Angels in America" (2003).

Streep was awarded the AFI Life Achievement Award in 2004, Gala Tribute from the Film Society of Lincoln Center in 2008, and Kennedy Center Honor in 2011 for her contribution to American culture through performing arts. President Barack Obama awarded her the 2010 National Medal of Arts, and in 2014, the Presidential Medal of Freedom. In 2003, the government of France made her a Commander of the Order of Arts and Letters. She received a Kennedy Center Honor in 2011 and was awarded the Golden Globe Cecil B. DeMille Award in 2017.

Mary Louise Streep was born on June 22, 1949, in Summit, New Jersey. She is the daughter of Mary Wilkinson Streep (née Mary Wolf Wilkinson), a commercial artist and art editor; and Harry William Streep, Jr., a pharmaceutical executive. The eldest child, she has two younger brothers - Dana David, and Harry William III.

Streep's father Harry was of German and Swiss ancestry. Her father's lineage traces back to Loffenau, Germany, from where her second great-grandfather, Gottfried Streeb, immigrated to the United States, and where one of her ancestors served as mayor (the surname was later changed to "Streep"). Another line of her father's family was from Giswil, Switzerland. Her mother had English, German, and Irish ancestry. Some of Streep's maternal ancestors lived in Pennsylvania and Rhode Island, and were descended from 17th-century immigrants from England. Her eighth great-grandfather, Lawrence Wilkinson, was one of the first Europeans to settle in Rhode Island. Streep is also a distant relative of William Penn, the founder of Pennsylvania; records show that her family is among the first purchasers of land in the state. Streep's maternal great-great-grandparents, Manus McFadden and Grace Strain, the latter the namesake of Streep's second daughter, were natives of the Horn Head district of Dunfanaghy, Ireland.
Streep's mother, whom she has compared in both appearance and manner to Dame Judi Dench, strongly encouraged her daughter, and instilled confidence in her from a very young age. Streep has said: "She was a mentor because she said to me, 'Meryl, you're capable. You're so great.' She was saying, 'You can do whatever you put your mind to. If you're lazy, you're not going to get it done. But if you put your mind to it, you can do anything.' And I believed her." Although Streep was naturally more introverted than her mother, at times, when she later needed an injection of confidence in adulthood, she would consult her mother, asking her for advice.

Streep was raised as a Presbyterian in Basking Ridge, New Jersey, and attended Cedar Hill Elementary School and the Oak Street School, which was a Junior High school back then. In her Junior High debut, she starred as Lousie Heller in the play "The Family Upstairs". In 1963, the family moved to Bernardsville, New Jersey, where she attended Bernards High School. Author Karina Longworth described her as a "gawky kid with glasses and frizzy hair", yet noted that she liked to show off in front of the camera in family home movies from a young age. At the age of 12, Streep was selected to sing at a school recital, leading to her having opera lessons from Estelle Liebling. However, despite her talent, she has remarked that, "I was singing something I didn't feel and understand. That was an important lesson - not to do that. To find the thing that I could feel through." She quit after four years. Streep had many Catholic school friends, and regularly attended mass.

Although in high school, Streep appeared in numerous school plays, she was uninterested in serious theater until acting in the play "Miss Julie" at Vassar College in 1969, in which she gained attention across the campus. Vassar drama professor Clinton J Atkinson noted, "I don't think anyone ever taught Meryl acting. She really taught herself." Streep demonstrated an early ability to mimic accents and to quickly memorize her lines. She received her BA "cum laude" from the college in 1971, before applying for an MFA from the Yale School of Drama. At Yale, she supplemented her course fees by waitressing and typing, and appeared in over a dozen stage productions a year, to the point that she became overworked, developing ulcers. She contemplated quitting acting and switching to study law. Streep played a variety of roles on stage, from Helena in "A Midsummer Night's Dream" to an 80-year-old woman in a wheelchair in a comedy written by then-unknown playwrights Christopher Durang and Albert Innaurato. She was a student of choreographer Carmen de Lavallade, who in 2017 she introduced at the Kennedy Center Honors. Another one of her teachers was Robert Lewis, one of the co-founders of the Actors Studio. Streep disapproved of some of the acting exercises she was asked to do, remarking that the professors "delved into personal lives in a way I find obnoxious". She received her MFA from Yale in 1975. Streep also enrolled as a visiting student at Dartmouth College in the fall of 1970, and received an Honorary Doctor of Arts degree from the college in 1981.

One of Meryl Streep’s first professional jobs in 1975, after Yale, was at the Eugene O'Neill Theater Center's National Playwrights Conference during which she acted in five plays over six weeks. Streep moved to New York City in 1975, and was cast by Joseph Papp in a production of "Trelawny of the Wells" at the Public Theater, opposite Mandy Patinkin and John Lithgow. She went on to appear in five more roles in her first year in New York, including in Papp's New York Shakespeare Festival productions of "Henry V", "The Taming of the Shrew" with Raúl Juliá, and "Measure for Measure" opposite Sam Waterston and John Cazale. She entered into a relationship with Cazale at this time, and resided with him until his death three years later. She starred in the musical "Happy End" on Broadway, and won an Obie for her performance in the off-Broadway play "Alice at the Palace".

Although she had not set out to make her career in film, Robert De Niro's performance in "Taxi Driver" (1976) had a profound impact on young Streep, who said to herself, "that's the kind of actor I want to be when I grow up". Streep began auditioning for film roles, and underwent an unsuccessful audition for the lead role in Dino De Laurentiis's "King Kong". Laurentiis stated in Italian to his son: "This is so ugly. Why did you bring me this?" Unknown to Laurentiis, Streep understood Italian, and she remarked, "I'm very sorry that I'm not as beautiful as I should be, but, you know - this is it. This is what you get." She continued to work on Broadway, appearing in the 1976 double bill of Tennessee Williams' "27 Wagons Full of Cotton" and Arthur Miller's "A Memory of Two Mondays". For the former, she received a Tony Award nomination for Best Featured Actress in a Play. Streep's other Broadway credits include Anton Chekhov's "The Cherry Orchard" and the Bertolt Brecht-Kurt Weill musical "Happy End", in which she had originally appeared off-Broadway at the Chelsea Theater Center. She received Drama Desk Award nominations for both productions.

Streep's first feature film role came opposite Jane Fonda in the 1977 film "Julia", in which she had a small role during a flashback sequence. Most of her scenes were edited out, but the brief time on screen horrified the actress: "I had a bad wig and they took the words from the scene I shot with Jane and put them in my mouth in a different scene. I thought, I've made a terrible mistake, no more movies. I hate this business." However, Streep cites Fonda as having a lasting influence on her as an actress, and has credited her as "open[ing] probably more doors than I probably even know about".

Robert De Niro, who had spotted Streep in her stage production of "The Cherry Orchard", suggested that she play the role of his girlfriend in the war film "The Deer Hunter" (1978). Cazale, who had been diagnosed with lung cancer, was also cast in the film, and Streep took on the role of a "vague, stock girlfriend" to remain with Cazale for the duration of filming. Longworth notes that Streep "made a case for female empowerment by playing a woman to whom empowerment was a foreign concept - a normal lady from an average American small town, for whom subservience was the only thing she knew". Pauline Kael, who would later become a strong critic of Streep, remarked that she was a "real beauty" who brought much freshness to the film with her performance. The film's success exposed Streep to a wider audience and earned her a nomination for the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress.

In the 1978 mini-series "Holocaust", Streep played the leading role of a German woman married to a Jewish artist in Nazi era Germany. She found the material to be "unrelentingly noble" and professed to have taken on the role for financial gain. Streep travelled to Germany and Austria for filming while Cazale remained in New York. Upon her return, Streep found that Cazale's illness had progressed, and she nursed him until his death on March 12, 1978. With an estimated audience of 109 million, "Holocaust" brought a wider degree of public recognition to Streep, who found herself "on the verge of national visibility". She won the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Miniseries or a Movie for her performance. Despite the awards success, Streep was still not enthusiastic towards her film career and preferred acting on stage.

Hoping to divert herself from the grief of Cazale's death, Streep accepted a role in "The Seduction of Joe Tynan" (1979) as the chirpy love interest of Alan Alda, later commenting that she played it on "automatic pilot". She performed the role of Katherine in "The Taming of the Shrew" for Shakespeare in the Park, and also played a supporting role in "Manhattan" (1979) for Woody Allen. Streep later said that Allen did not provide her with a complete script, giving her only the six pages of her own scenes, and did not permit her to improvise a word of her dialogue. In the drama "Kramer vs. Kramer", Streep was cast opposite Dustin Hoffman as an unhappily married woman who abandons her husband and child. Streep thought that the script portrayed the female character as "too evil" and insisted that it was not representative of real women who faced marriage breakdown and child custody battles. The makers agreed with her, and the script was revised. In preparing for the part, Streep spoke to her own mother about her life as a wife with a career, and frequented the Upper East Side neighborhood in which the film was set, watching the interactions between parents and children. The director Robert Benton allowed Streep to write her own dialogue in two key scenes, despite some objection from Hoffman, who "hated her guts". Jaffee and Hoffman later spoke of Streep's tirelessness, with Hoffman commenting, "She's extraordinarily hard-working, to the extent that she's obsessive. I think that she thinks about nothing else, but what she's doing." The film was controversial among feminists, but it was a role which film critic Stephen Farber believed displayed Streep's "own emotional intensity", writing that she was one of the "rare performers who can imbue the most routine moments with a hint of mystery".

For "Kramer vs. Kramer", Streep won both the Golden Globe Award and the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress, which she famously left in the ladies room after giving her speech. She was also awarded the Los Angeles Film Critics Association Award for Best Supporting Actress, National Board of Review Award for Best Supporting Actress and National Society of Film Critics Award for Best Supporting Actress for her collective work in her three film releases of 1979. Both "The Deer Hunter" and "Kramer vs. Kramer" were major commercial successes and were consecutive winners of the Academy Award for Best Picture.

In 1979, Streep began workshopping "Alice in Concert", a musical version of "Alice's Adventures in Wonderland", with writer and composer Elizabeth Swados and director Joseph Papp; the show was put on at New York's Public Theater from December 1980. Frank Rich of "The New York Times" referred to Streep as the production's "one wonder" but questioned why she devoted so much energy to it. By 1980, Streep had progressed to leading roles in films. She was featured on the cover of "Newsweek" magazine with the headline "A Star for the 80s"; Jack Kroll commented, "There's a sense of mystery in her acting; she doesn't simply imitate (although she's a great mimic in private). She transmits a sense of danger, a primal unease lying just below the surface of normal behavior". Streep denounced her fervent media coverage at the time as "excessive hype".

The story within a story drama "The French Lieutenant's Woman" (1981) was Streep's first leading role. The film paired Streep with Jeremy Irons as contemporary actors, telling their modern story, as well as the Victorian era drama they were performing. Streep perfected an English accent for the part, but considered herself a misfit for the role: " I couldn't help wishing that I was more beautiful". A "New York" magazine article commented that, while many female stars of the past had cultivated a singular identity in their films, Streep was a "chameleon", willing to play any type of role. Streep was awarded a BAFTA Award for Best Actress in a Leading Role for her work. The following year, she re-united with Robert Benton for the psychological thriller, "Still of the Night" (1982), co-starring Roy Scheider and Jessica Tandy. Vincent Canby, writing for "The New York Times", noted that the film was an homage to the works of Alfred Hitchcock, but that one of its main weaknesses was a lack of chemistry between Streep and Scheider, concluding that Streep "is stunning, but she's not on screen anywhere near long enough".

Greater success came later in the year when Streep starred in the drama "Sophie's Choice" (also 1982), portraying a Polish holocaust survivor caught in a love triangle between a young naïve writer (Peter MacNicol) and a Jewish intellectual (Kevin Kline). Streep's emotional dramatic performance and her apparent mastery of a Polish accent drew praise. William Styron wrote the novel with Ursula Andress in mind for the role of Sophie, but Streep was determined to get the role. Streep filmed the "choice" scene in one take and refused to do it again, finding it extremely painful and emotionally exhausting. That scene, in which Streep is ordered by an SS guard at Auschwitz to choose which of her two children would be gassed and which would proceed to the labor camp, is her most famous scene, according to Emma Brockes of "The Guardian" who wrote in 2006: "It's classic Streep, the kind of scene that makes your scalp tighten, but defter in a way is her handling of smaller, harder-to-grasp emotions". Among several acting awards, Streep won the Academy Award for Best Actress for her performance, and her characterization was voted the third greatest movie performance of all time by "Premiere" magazine. Roger Ebert said of her delivery, "Streep plays the Brooklyn scenes with an enchanting Polish-American accent (she has the first accent I've ever wanted to hug), and she plays the flashbacks in subtitled German and Polish. There is hardly an emotion that Streep doesn't touch in this movie, and yet we're never aware of her straining. This is one of the most astonishing and yet one of the most unaffected and natural performances I can imagine." Pauline Kael, on the contrary, called the film an "infuriatingly bad movie", and thought that Streep "decorporealizes" herself, which she believed explained why her movie heroines "don't seem to be full characters, and why there are no incidental joys to be had from watching her".

The year 1983 saw Streep play her first non-fictional character, the nuclear whistleblower and labor union activist Karen Silkwood who died in a suspicious car accident while investigating alleged wrongdoing at the Kerr-McGee plutonium plant, in Mike Nichols's biographical film "Silkwood". Streep felt a personal connection to Silkwood, and in preparation she met with people close to the woman, and in doing so realized that each person saw a different aspect of her personality. She said, "I didn't try to turn myself into Karen. I just tried to look at what she did. I put together every piece of information I could find about her... What I finally did was look at the events in her life, and try to understand her from the inside." Jack Kroll of "Newsweek" considered Streep's characterization to have been "brilliant", while Silkwood's boyfriend Drew Stephens expressed approval in that Streep had played Karen as a human being rather than a myth, despite Karen's father Bill thinking that Streep and the film had dumbed his daughter down. Pauline Kael believed that Streep had been miscast. Streep next played opposite Robert De Niro in the romance "Falling in Love" (1984), which was poorly received, and portrayed a fighter for the French Resistance during World War II in the British drama "Plenty" (1985), adapted from the play by David Hare. For the latter, Roger Ebert wrote that she conveyed "great subtlety; it is hard to play an unbalanced, neurotic, self-destructive woman, and do it with such gentleness and charm... Streep creates a whole character around a woman who could have simply been a catalogue of symptoms." In 2008, Molly Haskell praised Streep's performance in "Plenty", believing it to be "one of Streep's most difficult and ambiguous" films and "most feminist" role.

Longworth considers Streep's next release, "Out of Africa" (1985), to have established her as a Hollywood superstar. In the film, Streep starred as the Danish writer Karen Blixen, opposite Robert Redford's Denys Finch Hatton. Director Sydney Pollack was initially dubious about Streep in the role, as he did not think she was sexy enough, and had considered Jane Seymour for the part. Pollack recalls that Streep impressed him in a different way: "She was so direct, so honest, so without bullshit. There was no shielding between her and me." Streep and Pollack often clashed during the 101-day shoot in Kenya, particularly over Blixen's voice. Streep had spent much time listening to tapes of Blixen, and began speaking in an old-fashioned and aristocratic fashion, which Pollack thought excessive. A significant commercial and critical success, the film earned Streep another Academy Award nomination for Best Actress, and the film ultimately won Best Picture. Critic Stanley Kaufmann wrote, "Meryl Streep is back in top form. This means her performance in "Out of Africa" is at the highest level of acting in film today."

Longworth notes that the dramatic success of "Out of Africa" led to a backlash of critical opinion against Streep in the years that followed, especially as she was now demanding $4 million a picture. Unlike other stars at the time, such as Sylvester Stallone and Tom Cruise, Streep "never seemed to play herself", and certain critics felt her technical finesse led people to literally see her acting. Her next films did not appeal to a wide audience; she co-starred with Jack Nicholson in the dramas "Heartburn" (1986) and "Ironweed" (1987), in which she sang onscreen for the first time since the television movie "Secret Service" (1977). In "Evil Angels" (1988), she played Lindy Chamberlain, an Australian woman who had been convicted of the murder of her infant daughter despite claiming that the baby had been taken by a dingo. Filmed in Australia, Streep won the Australian Film Institute Award for Best Actress in a Leading Role, a Best Actress at the Cannes Film Festival, and the New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Actress. Streep has said of perfecting the Australian accent in the film: "I had to study a little bit for Australian because it's not dissimilar [to American], so it's like coming from Italian to Spanish. You get a little mixed up." Vincent Canby of "The New York Times" referred to her performance as "another stunning performance", played with "the kind of virtuosity that seems to re-define the possibilities of screen acting".

In 1989, Streep lobbied to play the lead role in Oliver Stone's adaption of the play "Evita", but two months before filming was due to commence, she dropped out, citing "exhaustion" initially, although it was later revealed that there was a dispute over her salary. By the end of the decade, Streep actively looked to star in a comedy. She found the role in "She-Devil" (1989), a satire that parodied Hollywood's obsession with beauty and cosmetic surgery, in which she played a glamorous writer. Though not a success, Richard Corliss of "Time" wrote that Streep was the "one reason" to see the film and observed that it marked a departure from the dramatic roles she was known to play. Reacting to her string of poorly received films, Streep said: "Audiences are shrinking; as the marketing strategy defines more and more narrowly who they want to reach males from 16 to 25 - it's become a chicken-and-egg syndrome. Which came first? First, they release all these summer movies, then do a demographic survey of who's going to see them."

Biographer Karen Hollinger described the early 1990s as a downturn in the popularity of Streep's films, attributing this partly to a critical perception that her comedies had been an attempt to convey a lighter image following several serious, but commercially unsuccessful, dramas, and, more significantly, to the lack of options available to an actress in her forties. Streep commented that she had limited her options by her preference to work in Los Angeles, close to her family, a situation that she had anticipated in a 1981 interview when she commented, "By the time an actress hits her mid-forties, no one's interested in her anymore. And if you want to fit a couple of babies into that schedule as well, you've got to pick your parts with great care." At the Screen Actor's Guild National Women's Conference in 1990, Streep keynoted the first national event, emphasizing the decline in women's work opportunities, pay parity, and role models within the film industry. She criticized the film industry for downplaying the importance of women both on screen and off.

After roles in the comedy-drama "Postcards from the Edge" (1990), and the comedy-fantasy "Defending Your Life" (1991), Streep starred with Goldie Hawn in the farcical black comedy, "Death Becomes Her" (1992), with Bruce Willis as their co-star. Streep persuaded writer David Koepp to re-write several of the scenes, particularly the one in which her character has an affair with a younger man, which she believed was "unrealistically male" in its conception. The seven-month shoot was the longest of Streep's career, during which she got into character by "thinking about being slightly pissed off all of the time". Due to Streep's allergies to numerous cosmetics, special prosthetics had to be designed to age her by ten years to look 54, although Streep believed that they made her look nearer 70. Longworth considers "Death Becomes Her" to have been "the most physical performance Streep had yet committed to screen, all broad weeping, smirking, and eye-rolling". Although it was a commercial success, earning $15.1 million in just five days, Streep's contribution to comedy was generally not taken well by critics. "Time"s Richard Corliss wrote approvingly of Streep's "wicked-witch routine" but dismissed the film as ""She-Devil" with a make-over" and one which "hates women".

Streep appeared with Jeremy Irons, Glenn Close and Winona Ryder in "The House of the Spirits" (1993), set during the military dictatorship of Chile. The film was not well received by critics. Anthony Lane of "The New Yorker" wrote: "This is really quite an achievement. It brings together Jeremy Irons, Meryl Streep, Winona Ryder, Antonio Banderas, and Vanessa Redgrave and insures that, without exception, they all give their worst performances ever". The following year, Streep featured in "The River Wild", as the mother of children on a whitewater rafting trip who encounter two violent criminals (Kevin Bacon and John C. Reilly) in the wilderness. Though critical reaction was generally mixed, Peter Travers of "Rolling Stone" found her to be "strong, sassy and looser than she has ever been onscreen".

Streep's most successful film of the decade was the romance "The Bridges of Madison County" (1995) directed by Clint Eastwood, who adapted the film from Robert James Waller's novel of the same name. It relates the story of Robert Kincaid (Eastwood), a photographer working for "National Geographic", who has a love affair with a middle-aged Italian farm wife in Iowa named Francesca (Streep). Though Streep disliked the novel it was based on, she found the script to be a special opportunity for an actress her age. She gained weight for the part, and dressed differently from the character in the book to emulate voluptuous Italian film stars such as Sophia Loren. Both Loren and Anna Magnani were an influence in her portrayal, and Streep viewed Pier Paolo Pasolini's "Mamma Roma" (1962) prior to filming. The film was a box office hit and grossed over $70 million in the United States. The film, unlike the novel, was warmly received by critics. Janet Maslin of "The New York Times" wrote that Eastwood had managed to create "a moving, elegiac love story at the heart of Mr. Waller's self-congratulatory overkill", while Joe Morgenstern of "The Wall Street Journal" described it as "one of the most pleasurable films in recent memory". Longworth believes that Streep's performance was "crucial to transforming what could have been a weak soap opera into a vibrant work of historical fiction implicitly critiquing postwar America's stifling culture of domesticity". She considers it to have been the role in which Streep became "arguably the first middle-aged actress to be taken seriously by Hollywood as a romantic heroine".

Streep played the estranged sister of Bessie (Diane Keaton), a woman battling leukemia, in "Marvin's Room" (1996), an adaptation of the play by Scott McPherson. Streep recommended Keaton for the role. The film also featured Leonardo DiCaprio as the rebellious son of Streep's character. Roger Ebert stated that, "Streep and Keaton, in their different styles, find ways to make Lee and Bessie into much more than the expression of their problems." The film was well received, and Streep earned another Golden Globe nomination for her performance.

As an Irishwoman, Streep acted opposite Michael Gambon and Catherine McCormack in Pat O'Connor's "Dancing at Lughnasa" (1998), which was entered into the Venice Film Festival in its year of release. Janet Maslin of "The New York Times" remarked that "Meryl Streep has made many a grand acting gesture in her career, but the way she simply peers out a window in "Dancing at Lughnasa" ranks with the best. Everything the viewer need know about Kate Mundy, the woman she plays here, is written on that prim, lonely face and its flabbergasted gaze". Later that year, she played a cancer sufferer caught in a difficult family situation, playing the mother of Renée Zellweger and wife of William Hurt in "One True Thing". The film gained positive reviews. Mick LaSalle in the "San Francisco Chronicle" declared, "After 'One True Thing', critics who persist in the fiction that Streep is a cold and technical actress will need to get their heads examined. She is so instinctive and natural - so thoroughly in the moment and operating on flights of inspiration - that she's able to give us a woman who's at once wildly idiosyncratic and utterly believable." "Los Angeles Times" film critic Kenneth Turan noted that her role "is one of the least self-consciously dramatic and surface showy of her career" but she "adds a level of honesty and reality that makes [her performance] one of her most moving".

Streep portrayed Roberta Guaspari, a real-life New Yorker who found passion and enlightenment teaching violin to the inner-city kids of East Harlem, in the music drama "Music of the Heart" (1999). A departure from director Wes Craven's previous work in films like "A Nightmare on Elm Street" and the "Scream" series, Streep replaced singer Madonna, who left the project before filming began due to creative differences with Craven. Required to perform on the violin, Streep went through two months of intense training, five to six hours a day. Streep received nominations for an Academy Award, a Golden Globe and a Screen Actors Guild Award for her performance. Roger Ebert wrote that "Meryl Streep is known for her mastery of accents; she may be the most versatile speaker in the movies. Here you might think she has no accent, unless you've heard her real speaking voice; then you realize that Guaspari's speaking style is no less a particular achievement than Streep's other accents. This is not Streep's voice, but someone else's - with a certain flat quality, as if later education and refinement came after a somewhat unsophisticated childhood."

Streep entered the 2000s with a voice cameo in Steven Spielberg's "A.I. Artificial Intelligence" (2001), a science fiction film about a childlike android, played by Haley Joel Osment. The same year, Streep co-hosted the annual Nobel Peace Prize Concert with Liam Neeson which was held in Oslo, Norway, on December 11, 2001, in honour of the Nobel Peace Prize laureate, the United Nations and Kofi Annan.

In 2001, Streep returned to the stage for the first time in more than twenty years, playing Arkadina in The Public Theater's revival of Anton Chekhov's "The Seagull", directed by Mike Nichols and co-starring Kevin Kline, Natalie Portman, and Philip Seymour Hoffman. The same year, she began work on Spike Jonze's comedy-drama "Adaptation" (2002), in which she portrayed real-life journalist Susan Orlean. Lauded by critics and viewers alike, the film won Streep her fourth Golden Globe in the Best Supporting Actress category. A. O. Scott in "The New York Times" considered Streep's portrayal of Orlean to have been "played with impish composure", noting the contrast in her "wittily realized" character with love interest Chris Cooper's "lank-haired, toothless charisma" as the autodidact arrested for poaching rare orchids. Streep appeared alongside Nicole Kidman and Julianne Moore in Stephen Daldry's "The Hours" (2002), based on the 1999 novel by Michael Cunningham. Focusing on three women of different generations whose lives are interconnected by the novel "Mrs. Dalloway" by Virginia Woolf, the film was generally well received and won all three leading actresses a Silver Bear for Best Actress.

Streep had a cameo as herself in the Farrelly brothers comedy "Stuck on You" (2003), and re-united with Mike Nichols to star with Al Pacino and Emma Thompson in the HBO adaptation of Tony Kushner's six-hour play "Angels in America" (2003), the story of two couples whose relationships dissolve amidst the backdrop of Reagan era politics. Streep, who was cast in four roles in the mini-series, received her second Emmy Award and fifth Golden Globe for her performance. 

She appeared in Jonathan Demme's moderately successful remake of "The Manchurian Candidate" (2004), co-starring Denzel Washington, playing the role of a woman who is both a U.S. senator and the manipulative, ruthless mother of a vice-presidential candidate. The same year, she played the supporting role of Aunt Josephine in "Lemony Snicket's A Series of Unfortunate Events" alongside Jim Carrey, based on the first three novels in Snicket's book series. The black comedy received generally favorable reviews from critics, and won the Academy Award for Best Makeup. Streep also narrated the film "Monet's Palate".

Streep was next cast in the comedy film "Prime" (2005), directed by Ben Younger. In the film, she played Lisa Metzger, the Jewish psychoanalyst of a divorced and lonesome business-woman, played by Uma Thurman, who enters a relationship with Metzger's 23-year-old son (Bryan Greenberg). A modest mainstream success, it eventually grossed US$67.9 million internationally. Roger Ebert noted how Streep had "that ability to cut through the solemnity of a scene with a zinger that reveals how all human effort is".

In August and September 2006, Streep starred onstage at The Public Theater's production of "Mother Courage and Her Children" at the Delacorte Theatre in Central Park. The Public Theater production was a new translation by playwright Tony Kushner ("Angels in America"), with songs in the Weill/Brecht style written by composer Jeanine Tesori ("Caroline, or Change"); veteran director George C. Wolfe was at the helm. Streep starred alongside Kevin Kline and Austin Pendleton in this three-and-a-half-hour play. Around the same time, Streep, along with Lily Tomlin, portrayed the last two members of what was once a popular family country music act in Robert Altman's final film "A Prairie Home Companion" (2006). A comedic ensemble piece featuring Lindsay Lohan, Tommy Lee Jones, Kevin Kline and Woody Harrelson, the film revolves around the behind-the-scenes activities at the long-running public radio show of the same name. The film grossed more than US$26 million, the majority of which came from domestic markets.

Commercially, Streep fared better with a role in "The Devil Wears Prada" (also 2006), a loose screen adaptation of Lauren Weisberger's 2003 novel of the same name. Streep portrayed the powerful and demanding Miranda Priestly, fashion magazine editor (and boss of a recent college graduate played by Anne Hathaway). Though the overall film received mixed reviews, her portrayal, of what Ebert calls the "poised and imperious Miranda", drew rave reviews from critics, and earned her many award nominations, including her record-setting 14th Oscar bid, as well as another Golden Globe. On its commercial release, the film became Streep's biggest commercial success to this point, grossing more than US$326.5 million worldwide.

She portrayed a wealthy university patron in Chen Shi-zheng's much-delayed feature drama "Dark Matter", a film about a Chinese science graduate student who becomes violent after dealing with academic politics at a U.S. university. Inspired by the events of the 1991 University of Iowa shooting, and initially scheduled for a 2007 release, producers and investors decided to shelve "Dark Matter" out of respect for the victims of the Virginia Tech massacre in April 2007. The drama received negative to mixed reviews upon its limited 2008 release. Streep played a U.S. government official who investigates an Egyptian foreign national suspected of terrorism in the political thriller "Rendition" (2007), directed by Gavin Hood. Keen to get involved in a thriller film, Streep welcomed the opportunity to star in a film genre for which she was not usually offered scripts, and immediately signed on to the project. Upon its release, "Rendition" was less commercially successful, and received mixed reviews.

In this period, Streep had a short role alongside Vanessa Redgrave, Glenn Close, and her eldest daughter Mamie Gummer in Lajos Koltai's drama film "Evening" (2007), based on the 1998 novel of the same name by Susan Minot. Switching between the present and the past, it tells the story of a bedridden woman, who remembers her tumultuous life in the mid-1950s. The film was released to a lukewarm reaction from critics, who called it "beautifully filmed, but decidedly dull [and] a colossal waste of a talented cast". She had a role in Robert Redford's "Lions for Lambs" (also 2007), a film about the connection between a platoon of United States soldiers in Afghanistan, a U.S. senator, a reporter, and a California college professor. Like "Evening", critics felt that the talent of the cast was wasted, and that it suffered from slow pacing, although one critic announced that Streep positively stood out, being "natural, unforced, quietly powerful", in comparison to Redford's forced performance.

Streep found major commercial success when she starred in Phyllida Lloyd's "Mamma Mia!" (2008), a film adaptation of the musical of the same name, based on the songs of Swedish pop group ABBA. Co-starring Amanda Seyfried, Pierce Brosnan, Stellan Skarsgård, Colin Firth, Julie Walters, and Christine Baranski, Streep played a single mother and a former girl-group singer, whose daughter (Seyfried), a bride-to-be who never met her father, invites three likely paternal candidates to her wedding on an idyllic Greek island. An instant box office success, "Mamma Mia!" became Streep's highest-grossing film to date, with box office receipts of US$602.6 million, also ranking it first among the highest-grossing musical films. Nominated for another Golden Globe, Streep's performance was generally well received by critics, with Wesley Morris of "The Boston Globe" commenting: "The greatest actor in American movies has finally become a movie star."

"Doubt" (also 2008) features Streep with Philip Seymour Hoffman, Amy Adams, and Viola Davis. A drama revolving around the stern principal nun (Streep) of a Bronx Catholic school in 1964 who brings accusations of pedophilia against a popular priest (Hoffman), the film became a moderate box office success, and was hailed by many critics as one of the best films of 2008. The film received five Academy Awards nominations, for its four lead actors and for Shanley's script. Ebert, who awarded the film the full four stars, highlighted Streep's caricature of a nun, who "hates all inroads of the modern world", while Kelly Vance of "The East Bay Express" remarked: "It's thrilling to see a pro like Streep step into an already wildly exaggerated role, and then ramp it up a few notches just for the sheer hell of it. Grim, red-eyed, deathly pale Sister Aloysius may be the scariest nun of all time."

In 2009, Streep played chef Julia Child in Nora Ephron's "Julie & Julia", co-starring with Stanley Tucci, and again with Amy Adams. (Tucci and Streep had worked together earlier in "Devil Wears Prada".) The first major motion picture based on a blog, "Julie and Julia" contrasts the life of Child in the early years of her culinary career with the life of young New Yorker Julie Powell (Adams), who aspires to cook all 524 recipes in Child's cookbook "Mastering the Art of French Cooking". Longworth believes her caricature of Julia Child was "quite possibly the biggest performance of her career, while also drawing on her own experience to bring lived-in truth to the story of a late bloomer". In Nancy Meyers' romantic comedy "It's Complicated" (also 2009), Streep starred with Alec Baldwin and Steve Martin. She received nominations for the Golden Globe Award for Best Actress - Motion Picture Musical or Comedy for both "Julie & Julia" and "It's Complicated"; she won the award for "Julie & Julia", and later received her 16th Oscar nomination for it. She also lent her voice to Mrs. Felicity Fox in the stop-motion film "Fantastic Mr. Fox".

Streep re-teamed with "Mamma Mia" director Phyllida Lloyd on "The Iron Lady" (2011), a British biographical film about Margaret Thatcher, which takes a look at the Prime Minister during the Falklands War and her years in retirement. Streep, who attended a session of the House of Commons to see British MPs in action in preparation for her role as Thatcher, called her casting "a daunting and exciting challenge". While the film had a mixed reception, Streep's performance gained rave reviews, earning her Best Actress awards at the Golden Globes and the BAFTAs, as well as her third win at the 84th Academy Awards. Former advisers, friends, and family of Thatcher criticized Streep's portrayal of her as "inaccurate" and "biased". The following year, after Thatcher's death, Streep issued a formal statement describing Thatcher's "hard-nosed fiscal measures" and "hands-off approach to financial regulation", while praising her "personal strength and grit".
Streep re-united with "Prada" director David Frankel on the set of the romantic comedy-drama film "Hope Springs" (2012), co-starring Tommy Lee Jones and Steve Carell. Streep and Jones play a middle-aged couple, who attend a week of intensive marriage counseling to try to bring back the intimacy missing in their relationship. Reviews for the film were mostly positive, with critics praising the "mesmerizing performances [...] which offer filmgoers some grown-up laughs - and a thoughtful look at mature relationships".

In 2013, Streep starred alongside Julia Roberts and Ewan McGregor in the black comedy drama "" (2013) about a dysfunctional family that re-unites into the familial house when their patriarch suddenly disappears. Based on Tracy Letts's Pulitzer Prize-winning , Streep received positive reviews for her portrayal of the family's strong-willed and contentious matriarch, who is suffering from oral cancer and an addiction to narcotics, and was subsequently nominated for another Golden Globe, SAG, and Academy Award. At the National Board of Review Awards in 2013, Streep labeled Walt Disney as "anti-semitic" and a "gender bigot". Former actors, employees and animators who knew Disney during his lifetime rebuffed the comments as misinformed and selective. The Walt Disney Family Museum issued a statement rebuking Streep's allegations indirectly, citing, among others, Disney's contributions to Jewish charities and his published letters stating that women "have the right to expect the same chances for advancement as men". However, Disney's grandniece, Abigail Disney, wholeheartedly agreed with Streep's statements, stating that he was an "anti-Semite" and "racist" who was also an exemplary filmmaker whose work "made billions of people happy".

In 2014's "The Giver", a motion picture adaptation of the young adult novel, Streep played a community leader. Set in 2048, the social science fiction film recounts the story of a post-apocalyptic community without war, pain, suffering, differences or choice, where a young boy is chosen to learn the real world. Streep was aware of the book before being offered the role by co-star and producer Jeff Bridges. Upon its release, "The Giver" was met with generally mixed to negative reviews from critics. Streep also had a small role in the period drama film "The Homesman" (2014). Set in the 1850s midwest, the film stars Hilary Swank and Tommy Lee Jones as an unusual pair who help three women driven to madness by the frontier to get back East. Streep does not appear until near the end of the film, playing a preacher's wife, who takes the women into care. "The Homesman" premiered at the 2014 Cannes Film Festival where it garnered largely positive reviews from critics.

Directed by Rob Marshall, "Into the Woods" (also 2014) is a Disney film adaptation of the Broadway musical with music and lyrics by Stephen Sondheim in which Streep plays a witch. A fantasy genre crossover inspired by the Grimm Brothers' fairy tales, it centers on a childless couple who set out to end a curse placed on them by Streep's vengeful witch. Though the film was dismissed by some critics such as Mark Kermode as "irritating naffness", Streep's performance earned her Academy Award, Golden Globe, SAG, and Critic's Choice Award nominations for Best Supporting Actress. In July 2014, it was announced that Streep would portray Maria Callas in "Master Class", but the project was pulled after director Mike Nichols's death in November of the same year.
In 2015, Streep starred in Jonathan Demme's "Ricki and the Flash", playing a grocery store checkout worker by day who is a rock musician at night, and who has one last chance to reconnect with her estranged family. Streep learned to play the guitar for the semi-autobiographical drama-comedy film, which again featured Streep with her eldest daughter Mamie Gummer. Reviews of the film were generally mixed. Streep's other film of this time was director Sarah Gavron's period drama "Suffragette" (also 2015), co-starring Carey Mulligan and Helena Bonham Carter. In the film, she played the small, but pivotal, role of Emmeline Pankhurst, a British political activist and leader of the British suffragette movement who helped women win the right to vote. The film received mostly positive reviews, particularly for the performances of the cast, though its distributor earned criticism that Streep's prominent position within the marketing was misleading.

In February 2016, Streep was president of the main competition jury at the 66th Berlin International Film Festival. Her only film that year was the Stephen Frears-directed comedy "Florence Foster Jenkins" (2016), an eponymous biopic about a blithely unaware tone-deaf opera singer who insists upon public performance. Other cast members were Hugh Grant and Simon Helberg. For her performance, Streep won the Critics' Choice Movie Award for Best Actress in a Comedy, and received Academy Award, Golden Globe, SAG, and BAFTA nominations. In 2017, Streep starred as the U.S.'s first female newspaper publisher, Kay Graham, to Tom Hanks' Ben Bradlee, in Steven Spielberg's drama "The Post", which centers on "The Washington Post"s publication of the 1971 Pentagon Papers. The film received highly positive reviews, with specific praise for the performances of the two leads. Streep received her 31st Golden Globe nomination at the 75th Golden Globe Awards, and 21st Academy Award at the 90th Academy Awards for Best Actress.

In February 2017, Streep again worked with Rob Marshall and Emily Blunt, in "Mary Poppins Returns" (2018), playing the titular character's cousin Topsy. The film also re-unites Streep with Colin Firth and Julie Walters. Streep is set to reprise her role as Donna Sheridan from "Mamma Mia!", along with the majority of the original cast, in the 2018 sequel "Mamma Mia! Here We Go Again." She will also join the second season of the HBO miniseries "Big Little Lies", in which she will play Mary-Louise Wright, the mother-in-law to Nicole Kidman's character.

"Vanity Fair" commented that "it's hard to imagine that there was a time before Meryl Streep was the greatest-living actress". Emma Brockes of "The Guardian" notes that despite Streep's being "one of the most famous actresses in the world", it is "strangely hard to pin an image on Streep", in a career where she has "laboured to establish herself as an actor whose roots lie in ordinary life". Despite her success, Streep has always been modest about her own acting and achievements in cinema. She has stated that she has no particular method when it comes to acting, learning from the days of her early studies that she cannot articulate her practice. She said in 1987, "I have a smattering of things I've learned from different teachers, but nothing I can put into a valise and open it up and say, 'Now, which one would you like?' Nothing I can count on, and that makes it more dangerous. But then, the danger makes it more exciting." She has stated that her ideal director is one who gives her complete artistic control, and allowing her a degree of improvisation and to learn from her own mistakes.

Karina Longworth notes how "external" Streep's performances are, "chameleonic" in her impersonation of characters, "subsuming herself into them, rather than personifying them". In her early roles such as "Manhattan" and "Kramer vs. Kramer", she was compared to both Diane Keaton and Jill Clayburgh, in that her characters were unsympathetic, which Streep has attributed to the tendency to be drawn to playing women who are difficult to like and lack empathy. Streep has stated that many consider her to be a technical actor, but she professed that it comes down to her love of reading the initial script, adding, "I come ready and I don't want to screw around and waste the first 10 takes on adjusting lighting and everybody else getting comfortable".
Mike Nichols, who directed Streep in "Silkwood", "Heartburn", "Postcards from the Edge", and "Angels in America", praised Streep's ability to transform herself into her characters, remarking that, "In every role, she becomes a totally new human being. As she becomes the person she is portraying, the other performers begin to react to her as if she were that person." He said that directing her is "so much like falling in love that it has the characteristics of a time which you remember as magical, but which is shrouded in mystery". He also noted that Streep's acting ability had a profound impact on her co-stars, and that "one could improve by 1000% purely by watching her".
Longworth believes that in nearly every film, Streep has "sly infused" a feminist point of view in her portrayals. However, film critic Molly Haskell has stated, "None of her heroines are feminist, strictly speaking. Yet, they uncannily embody various crosscurrents of experience in the last twenty years, as women have re-defined themselves against the background of the women's movement".

Streep is well known for her ability to imitate a wide range of accents - from Danish in "Out of Africa" (1985) to British received pronunciation in "The French Lieutenant's Woman" (1981), "Plenty" (1985), and "The Iron Lady" (2011); Italian in "The Bridges of Madison County" (1995); a southern American accent in The Seduction of Joe Tynan (1979); a Minnesota accent in "A Prairie Home Companion" (2006); Irish-American in "Ironweed" (1987); and a heavy Bronx accent in "Doubt" (2008). Streep has stated that she grew up listening to artists such as Barbra Streisand, The Beatles, and Bob Dylan, and she learned a lot about how to use her voice, her "instrument", by listening to Barbra Streisand's albums. In the film "Evil Angels" (1988, released in the U.S. as "A Cry in the Dark"), in which she portrays a New Zealand transplant to Australia, Streep perfected a hybrid of Australian and New Zealand English. Her performance received the Australian Film Institute Award for Best Actress in a Leading Role, as well as Best Actress at the Cannes Film Festival, and the New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Actress.

For her role in the film "Sophie's Choice" (1982), Streep spoke both English and German with a Polish accent, as well as Polish itself. In "The Iron Lady", she reproduced the vocal style of Margaret Thatcher from the time before Thatcher became Britain's Prime Minister, and after she had taken elocution lessons to change her pitch, pronunciation, and delivery. Streep has commented that using accents as part of her acting is a technique she views as an obvious requirement in her portrayal of a character.
When questioned in Belfast as to how she reproduces different accents, Streep replied in a perfect Belfast accent: "I listen."

In 2004, Streep was awarded the AFI Life Achievement Award by the board of directors of the American Film Institute.

After Streep appeared in "Mamma Mia!", her rendition of the song "Mamma Mia" rose to popularity in the Portuguese music charts, where it peaked at No. 8 in October 2008. At the 35th People's Choice Awards, her version of "Mamma Mia" won an award for "Favorite Song From A Soundtrack". In 2008, Streep was nominated for a Grammy Award (her fifth nomination) for her work on the "Mamma Mia!" soundtrack. Streep has narrated numerous audio books, including three by children's book author William Steig: "Brae Irene", "Spinky Sulks", and "The One and Only Shrek!."

Streep is the spokesperson for the National Women's History Museum, to which she has made significant donations (including her fee for "The Iron Lady, "which was $1 million), and hosted numerous events. On October 4, 2012, Streep donated $1 million to The Public Theater in honor of both its late founder, Joseph Papp, and her friend, the author Nora Ephron. She also supports Gucci's "Chime for Change" campaign that aims to spread female empowerment.

In 2014, Streep established two scholarships for students at the University of Massachusetts Lowell - the Meryl Streep Endowed Scholarship for English majors, and the Joan Hertzberg Endowed Scholarship (named for Streep's former classmate at Vassar College) for math majors.

In April 2015, it was announced that Streep had funded a screenwriters lab for female screenwriters over forty years old, called the Writers Lab, to be run by New York Women in Film & Television and the collective IRIS. The Lab was the only one of its kind in the world for female screenwriters over forty years old. In 2015, Streep signed an open letter for which the ONE Campaign had been collecting signatures; the letter was addressed to Angela Merkel and Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma, urging them to focus on women as they served as heads of the G7 in Germany and the AU in South Africa, respectively, in setting development funding priorities. Also in 2015, Streep sent each member of the U.S. Congress a letter supporting the Equal Rights Amendment. Each of her letters was sent with a copy of the book "Equal Means Equal: Why the Time for the ERA is Now" by Jessica Neuwirth, president of the ERA Coalition. 

Streep, when asked in a 2015 interview by "Time Out" magazine if she was a feminist, answered, "I am a humanist; I am for nice easy balance." In March 2016, Streep, among others, signed a letter asking for gender equality throughout the world, in observance of International Women's Day; this was also organized by the ONE Campaign. In 2018, she collaborated with 300 women in Hollywood to set up the Time's Up initiative to protect women from harassment and discrimination.

Streep on April 25, 2017 publicly backed the campaign to free Oleg Sentsov, a Ukrainian filmmaker from Crimea who was subjected to a sham trial by Russia and jailed in Siberia for 20 years in August 2015. She was pictured alongside Ukrainian lawmaker Mustafa Nayyem with a “Free Sentsov” sign in a photograph taken during the PEN America Annual Literary Gala on April 25, at which Sentsov was honoured with a 2017 PEN/Barbey Freedom to Write award.

Politically, Streep has described herself as part of the American Left. She gave a speech at the 2016 Democratic National Convention in support of presidential nominee Hillary Clinton.

On January 8, 2017, Streep accepted the Cecil B. DeMille Award for Lifetime Achievement at the Golden Globes, during which she delivered a highly political speech that criticized then-President-elect Donald Trump. She said that Trump had a very strong platform and was using it inappropriately. She said that he mocked a disabled reporter, Serge F. Kovaleski, whom, in her words, Trump "outranked in privilege, power, and the capacity to fight back", and that, "When the powerful use their position to bully, we all lose". She also said, "Hollywood is crawling with outsiders and foreigners, and if you kick us all out, you'll have nothing to watch except for football and mixed martial arts, which are not arts." Trump responded on Twitter by calling Streep "one of the most over-rated actresses in Hollywood", and "a Hillary flunky who lost big".

Author Karina Longworth notes that despite her "high level of stardom" for decades, Streep has managed to maintain a relatively normal personal life. Streep lived with actor John Cazale for three years until his death from lung cancer in March 1978. Streep said of his death, "I didn't get over it. I don't want to get over it. No matter what you do, the pain is always there in some recess of your mind, and it affects everything that happens afterwards. I think you can assimilate the pain and go on without making an obsession of it."

Streep married sculptor Don Gummer six months after Cazale's death. They have four children: musician Henry (born 1979), actresses Mamie (born 1983) and Grace (born 1986), and model Louisa (born 1991). In August 1985, the family moved into a $1.8-million private estate in Connecticut, with an extensive art studio to facilitate Streep's husband's work, and lived there until they bought a $3-million mansion in Brentwood, Los Angeles, in 1990. They eventually moved back to Connecticut. Streep is the godmother of fellow actress Billie Lourd, daughter of Carrie Fisher.

When asked if religion plays a part in her life in 2009, Streep replied: "I follow no doctrine. I don't belong to a church or a temple or a synagogue or an ashram." In an interview in December 2008, she also alluded to her lack of religious belief when she said: "So, I've always been really, deeply interested, because I think I can understand the solace that's available in the whole construct of religion. But I really don't believe in the power of prayer, or things would have been avoided that have happened, that are awful. So, it's a horrible position as an intelligent, emotional, yearning human being to sit outside of the available comfort there. But I just can't go there."

When asked from where she draws consolation in the face of aging and death, Streep responded: "Consolation? I'm not sure I have it. I have a belief, I guess, in the power of the aggregate human attempt - the best of ourselves. In love and hope and optimism - you know, the magic things that seem inexplicable. Why we are the way we are. I do have a sense of trying to make things better. Where does that come from?"




</doc>
<doc id="1339248" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1339248" title="Brie Larson">
Brie Larson

Brianne Sidonie Desaulniers (born October 1, 1989), known professionally as Brie Larson, is an American actress, singer, songwriter, musician, screenwriter, producer and director. Born in Sacramento, California, Larson was home-schooled before she was accepted at the American Conservatory Theater at the age of 6, becoming the youngest student accepted there. She began her acting career at the age of 8 on television, appearing on "The Tonight Show with Jay Leno". She appeared as a regular on the 2001 sitcom "Raising Dad", for which she was nominated for a Young Artist Award.

As a teenager, Larson had brief roles in the 2004 films "13 Going on 30" and "Sleepover". Her performance in the comedy film "Hoot" (2006) was praised, and she subsequently played supporting roles in the films "Greenberg" (2010), "Scott Pilgrim vs. the World" (2010), "21 Jump Street" (2012), "Don Jon" (2013) and "The Spectacular Now" (2013) . From 2009 to 2011, Larson appeared as a rebellious teenager in the television series "United States of Tara".

Larson's breakthrough role came with the acclaimed independent drama "Short Term 12" (2013). Further success came in 2015 when she starred in "Room", an acclaimed drama based on Emma Donoghue's novel of the same name. She won several awards for her portrayal of a kidnapping victim in the film, including the Academy Award, BAFTA Award, Critic's Choice Award, Golden Globe Award, SAG Award, and Canadian Screen Award for Best Actress. In 2016, she was announced to be portraying Carol Danvers/Captain Marvel in the Marvel Cinematic Universe, making her first appearance in the eponymous film to be released in 2019. 

In 2017, she starred as an anti-war photographer in the adventure film "", her highest-grossing release, and received acclaim for her performance in the biographical drama "The Glass Castle".

Brie Larson was born on October 1, 1989 in Sacramento, California, the first daughter of Heather (née Edwards) and Sylvain Desaulniers. Her parents were chiropractors who ran a practice together. Her parents divorced when she was a child, and she moved to Los Angeles with her mother and her sister. She studied acting at the American Conservatory Theater in San Francisco. Before that she was home-schooled.

Her paternal grandparents were French-Canadians from Manitoba. Her paternal grandmother, Gabrielle Desaulniers, died in December 2015. Growing up, Larson's first language was French. Brie stated on "The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon" that she took her stage name from Kirsten Larson, an American Girl doll she received as a child.

Larson's first job was performing in sketches on "The Tonight Show with Jay Leno". Soon after, she was cast in the television series "Schimmel", which never aired because its star, Robert Schimmel, was diagnosed with cancer shortly before filming was to begin. After it was "on hold" for ten months, Fox canceled the show. Larson later auditioned for a new show for The WB called "In Your Dreams", and landed the role of Bob Saget's character's younger daughter, Emily. The show was selected for the 2001–02 fall season, and was renamed "Raising Dad". It was then canceled after 22 episodes. Larson was also cast in the pilot for the ABC sitcom "Hope & Faith", but she and some other cast members were dropped after the unaired pilot.
In 2003, she starred alongside Beverley Mitchell on the Disney Channel original movie "Right on Track". In July 2004, she co-starred with a large cast of teen actors in the film "Sleepover". She also had a small role in the movie "13 Going on 30". Larson appeared in the 2006 film "Hoot", opposite actors Logan Lerman and Cody Linley. Her voice is also featured in the film "Farce of the Penguins" as a teenage penguin. She played Angie in the 2007 comedy-drama "Remember the Daze" and also appeared in the 2008 short film "The Babysitter", written and directed by David H. Steinberg. She appeared in an episode of "Ghost Whisperer" in January 2008. She also has a role as Kate in the 2008 film, "Tanner Hall", directed by Francesca Gregorini and Princess Tatiana von Fürstenberg. Larson played the character Kate Gregson on the Showtime series "United States of Tara". The show premiered on January 18, 2009 and was not renewed after its third season. The season finale aired on June 20, 2011.

In 2012, Larson played Molly in the film adaptation of the popular 1980s TV show "21 Jump Street", co-starring with Jonah Hill and Channing Tatum. In 2013, she guest-starred as Rachel in an episode of "Community" titled "Herstory of Dance", and again in the episode "Analysis of Cork-Based Networking" the following year. In 2013, she also starred in "Short Term 12". She appeared as a guest on "The Late Late Show with Craig Ferguson" several times between 2010 and 2013.

In 2015, Larson played the sister of Amy Schumer's character in the film "Trainwreck". She also starred in "Room", a film adapted from the novel of the same name by Emma Donoghue. The film played at the Toronto International Film Festival, and began its theatrical release on October 16, 2015. It has received widespread critical acclaim, particularly for Larson's performance, which earned her several awards, including the Academy Award for Best Actress as well as Golden Globe & BAFTA Awards.

In 2016, it was confirmed that Larson would reunite with her "Short Term 12" director, Destin Daniel Cretton, for "The Glass Castle." The Lionsgate’s script is an adaptation of Jeannette Walls' memoir. It tells the story of a successful young woman who was raised by dysfunctional and nonconformist parents. Her world gets turned upside down when they move to New York to be near her. Woody Harrelson is already on board as the woman’s alcoholic father with Naomi Watts joining the project as Larson's eccentric mother. The film begins production in West Virginia in May 2016 with Gil Netter producing. Later on in June, "The Hollywood Reporter" reported that Larson was the favorite to star as Carol Danvers / Captain Marvel in the upcoming Marvel Studios film "Captain Marvel". Marvel later announced her casting at a panel at the 2016 San Diego Comic-Con International.

In 2017, Larson starred in the second installment of Legendary Studios' MonsterVerse, the fantasy-action film "", along with Samuel L. Jackson and Tom Hiddleston, where she played an activist photographer. It proved to be her highest-grossing release.

In March 2017, Larson was cast as the titular lead in "Victoria Woodhull," a biopic produced by Amazon Studios about the first female presidential candidate in U.S. history, which she will also produce.

Larson has launched a career as a musician, singer and songwriter, and after releasing her debut album in a major record label in 2005, she has since been performing in live concerts throughout the United States. A second album came to production and was completed but never released. Larson revealed plans to release an EP, but that also never reached the public. She did not give up on her career as a musician, but it is not known when she will release new songs. Her last public appearance as a singer was in 2010, when she performed "Black Sheep", along with the band Metric in the movie "Scott Pilgrim vs. the World".

Her interest in being a singer started in early 2003, when she began to promote her songs through her personal website and was already showing interest in releasing an album. The first leaked was "Go Goodbye", a song about "two great people who just aren't great together", in her own words and along with "Invisible Girl", were the tracks that led Larson to sign a record deal some time after with Casablanca Records, a Universal Records imprint. Both songs were produced and written with the help of Michael Binikos and Craig Bartock. In 2003, she leaked another track, "Not a Freak" and this time there was even a music video for it, which was available for purchase online. In late spring of 2004, she removed all the songs on her website due to Casablanca's contract restrictions and was in the process of recording new songs for her first album.

In October of that same year, her willingness to release an album was coming closer and "She Said", the first single from her yet-to-be-released debut album at that time was available to listen via her official website gaining an official release in iTunes in December and was sent to radios across the country in the following month. Despite having been the 99th best-selling CD single in the country in 2005, according to SoundScan and peaking at number 31 on the "Billboard" Hot 100 Single Sales, the song failed to reach the Top 40 of the most played songs in the country, receiving low airplay. She also recorded live performances for AOL Sessions on October 11, 2004.

Her only released album, "Finally Out of P.E.", went on sale in late 2005 and sold 3,500 copies in U.S. Before its release, her record label released a DVD featuring "She Said" music video, the making of it and her AOL Sessions performances. The entire album was focused in teenage audiences and that became clear while she was playing in Teen People's Rock in Shop Tour, went on tour with Jesse McCartney and received a lot of airplay from children-oriented radios like Radio Disney and Radio KOL. The music video for "She Said", directed by Chris Applebaum, showed a story about a bored fast food restaurant worker who was aiming to sing and, that way, "finding herself". She also sang "Hope Has Wings", the song from the credits of the movie "Barbie and the Magic of Pegasus". A music video for the song appears as a bonus feature on the movie's DVD.

In 2006, she recorded a song slightly different from her previous works for the soundtrack of the "Hoot" movie, "Coming Around", co-written with Jacques Brautbar and Rami Perlman, vocalist and guitarist of a Los Angeles-based independent band. On March 1, 2006, Larson performed an acoustic set of new songs at L.A.'s famous Viper Room. The songs played were "Dear Universe", "Powershift", "Stilts and the Titanic", "Superstition", a cover of Indigo Girls' "Closer to Fine" and "Falling Into History", a track from her album. From the new songs, the only one to be leaked in a studio recording was "Stilts and the Titanic", produced and co-written by Binikos. The song was made available to listen and download as a demo version in Larson's Official Myspace in the summer 2006. On October 22, 2008 she announced to fans in a blog published in her official Myspace page that she will be recording a 5 track EP with new material and will provide backing vocals for artist Caitlin Crosby's latest album. The EP was announced to include a re-recorded version of "Ugly", a track from her first studio album, as well as four new songs: "Dear Universe", "Sharpen My Nails", "Arielle", and "If All Goes Well".

Larson has written and directed two short films, titled "Weighting" (2011), and "The Arm" (2012). She has also appeared in a stage production of "Our Town" at the Williamstown Theatre Festival. Larson will be making her directorial debut in the comedy "Unicorn Store".

She is an advocate for sexual assault victims. At the 2017 Academy Awards of Motion Pictures and Sciences, Larson presented Casey Affleck with the Best Actor award, but in light of his past sexual harassment allegations, Larson took a step back and stood with both her arms at her side during a standing ovation from the audience for Affleck. Commenting on her actions, Larson told Vanity Fair, “I think that whatever it was that I did on stage kind of spoke for itself."

In August 2017, Larson distanced herself from the non-profit cinematheque Cinefamily after several women accused its co-founder Hadrian Belove and vice president of the board of directors Shadie Elnashai of sexual harassment and assault.

Larson has been in a relationship with musician Alex Greenwald since 2013. In May 2016, Larson's rep confirmed that she and Greenwald are engaged. In February 2016, Larson told "Elle" that she has not spoken to her father in over ten years.


Larson was awarded the Academy Award, Screen Actors Guild Award, BAFTA Award and Golden Globe Award for Best Actress for her performance in "Room" (2015).


</doc>
<doc id="63523" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63523" title="Sissy Spacek">
Sissy Spacek

Mary Elizabeth "Sissy" Spacek (; born December 25, 1949) is an American actress and singer. She began her career in the early 1970s and first gained attention for her role in the film "Badlands" (1973). Her major breakthrough came in 1976 when she played the title character of Carrie White in Brian De Palma's horror film "Carrie", based on the first novel by Stephen King, for which she earned an Oscar nomination (a rare feat for an actor or actress in a horror movie). She won the Academy Award for Best Actress for her portrayal of Loretta Lynn in the 1980 film "Coal Miner's Daughter," and also earned a Grammy nomination for the song "Coal Miner's Daughter" from the film's soundtrack. She went on to receive further Oscar nominations for her roles in "Missing" (1982), "The River" (1984) and "Crimes of the Heart" (1986). "Coal Miner's Daughter" and "Crimes of the Heart" also won her the Golden Globe Award for Best Actress in a Musical or Comedy.

A six-time Oscar nominee, she received her sixth nomination for "In the Bedroom" (2001), which also won her a third Golden Globe, this time for Best Actress in a Drama. Her other films include "3 Women" (1977), "Raggedy Man" (1981), "JFK" (1991), "Affliction" (1997), "The Straight Story" (1999), "Tuck Everlasting" (2002), "Nine Lives" (2005) and "The Help" (2011). Spacek also played matriarch Sally Rayburn in the Netflix thriller series "Bloodline". The show was canceled in 2016, airing its third and final season in 2017.

Spacek was born on December 25, 1949, in Quitman, Texas, the daughter of Virginia Frances (née Spilman; December 18, 1917 – November 10, 1981) and Edwin Arnold Spacek Sr. (July 3, 1910 – January 7, 2001), a county agricultural agent. Her mother, who was of Polish, English and Irish descent, was from the Rio Grande Valley of Texas. At age 6, she performed on stage for the first time, appearing in a local talent show. Although her birth name was Mary Elizabeth, from birth, she was always called Sissy by her brothers which led to her stage name. She attended Quitman High School and was named homecoming queen at her senior prom.

Spacek was greatly affected by the death of her close 18-year-old brother, Robbie, in 1967 from leukemia when she was 17, which she has called "the defining event of my whole life." Spacek used the personal tragedy as a tool to be fearless in her acting career: "I think it made me brave. Once you experience something like that, you’ve experienced the ultimate tragedy. And if you can continue, nothing else frightens you. That’s what I meant about it being rocket fuel – I was fearless in a way. Maybe it gave more depth to my work because I had already experienced something profound and life-changing."

Spacek worked for a time as a photographic model (represented by Ford Models) and as an extra at Andy Warhol's Factory. She appeared in a non-credited role in his film "Trash" (1970). With the help of her cousin, actor Rip Torn, she enrolled in Lee Strasberg's Actors Studio and then the Lee Strasberg Institute in New York. Her first credited role was in "Prime Cut" (1972), in which she played Poppy, a girl sold into sexual slavery. The role led to television work, which included a guest role in "The Waltons", which she played twice in 1973. Spacek received international attention after starring in Terrence Malick's "Badlands" (1973), in which she played Holly, the film's narrator and a 15-year-old girlfriend of mass-murderer Kit (Martin Sheen). Spacek has described "Badlands" as the "most incredible" experience of her career. On the set of "Badlands", Spacek met art director Jack Fisk, whom she married in 1974.

Spacek's iconic and career-defining role came in Brian De Palma's film "Carrie" (1976), in which she played Carietta "Carrie" White, a shy, troubled high school senior with telekinetic powers. Spacek had to work hard to persuade director de Palma to engage her for the role. After rubbing Vaseline into her hair and donning an old sailor dress her mother made for her as a child, Spacek turned up at the audition with the odds against her, but won the part. She was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Actress for her work in the film. Spacek had previously been the set dresser for DePalma's film "Phantom of the Paradise" (1974).

After "Carrie", Spacek played the small role of housekeeper Linda Murray in Alan Rudolph's ensemble piece "Welcome to LA" (1976) and cemented her reputation in independent cinema with her performance as Pinky Rose in Robert Altman's classic "3 Women" (1977). Altman was deeply impressed by her performance, having stated: "She's remarkable, one of the top actresses I've ever worked with. Her resources are like a deep well." Brian de Palma added: "[Spacek is] a phantom. She has this mysterious way of slipping into a part, letting it take over her. She's got a wider range than any young actress I know." Spacek also helped finance then-brother-in-law David Lynch's directorial debut, "Eraserhead" (1977) and is thanked in the credits of the film.

Spacek began the 1980s with an Oscar award for her role in "Coal Miner's Daughter" (1980), in which she played country music star Loretta Lynn, who selected her for the role. In the film, both she and Beverly D'Angelo, who played Patsy Cline, performed their own singing. Film critic Roger Ebert has credited the movie's success "to the performance by Sissy Spacek as Loretta Lynn. With the same sort of magical chemistry she's shown before, when she played the high school kid in "Carrie," Spacek at 29 has the ability to appear to be almost any age on screen. Here, she ages from about 14 to somewhere in her 30s, always looks the age, and never seems to be wearing makeup." Spacek also was nominated for a Grammy Award for her singing on the film's soundtrack album. She followed this with her own country album, "Hangin' Up My Heart" (1983); the album spawned one hit single, "Lonely But Only For You", a song written by K. T. Oslin, which reached No. 15 on the Billboard Country chart.

In the film "Heart Beat" (1980), Spacek played Carolyn Cassady, who slipped (under the influence of John Heard's Jack Kerouac and Nick Nolte's Neal Cassady) into a combination of drudgery and debauchery. Spacek was so adamant about getting the role, that she pored through over 4,000 pages of research to prepare for her character. Producer Ed Pressman and director John Byrum took her to dinner to advise her that she did not have the role. Spacek was so distraught at the news that she shattered a glass of wine in her hand. After that, Pressman walked up to Spacek with a piece of shattered glass and told her she had the role. He said that Spacek breaking the glass clinched the deal, and they believed she would ultimately best suit the part. The film was released on April 25, 1980 to mixed critical reviews.

Also in the 1980s, Spacek starred alongside Jack Lemmon in Constantin Costa-Gavras's political thriller "Missing" (1982, based on the book "The Execution of Charles Horman") and appeared with Mel Gibson in the rural drama "The River" (1984), and with Diane Keaton and Jessica Lange in 1986's "Crimes of the Heart" (1986). She was nominated for the Best Actress Oscar for all of these roles. Other performances of the decade included star turns in husband Jack Fisk's directorial debut "Raggedy Man" (1981) and alongside Anne Bancroft in the suicide-themed drama "'night, Mother" (1986). Spacek also showed her lighter side by voicing the brain in the Steve Martin comedy "The Man with Two Brains" (1983).

She had a supporting role as the wife of Jim Garrison (played by Kevin Costner) in Oliver Stone's "JFK" (1991) and made a number of comedies, TV movies, and the occasional film. Most notable of her appearances during these years was her turn as the evil Verena Talbo in the ensemble piece "The Grass Harp" (1995), which reunited her with both Laurie and Lemmon, as well as a supporting performance, again alongside Nick Nolte, as the waitress Margie Fogg in Paul Schrader's father-son psychodrama "Affliction" (1997). She also played Rose Straight in David Lynch's "The Straight Story" (1999) and Brendan Fraser's character's mother in "Blast from the Past".

In 2001, she was again nominated for the Academy Award for Best Actress, for her work in Todd Field's "In the Bedroom" (2001). "The New York Times" film critic Stephen Holden said of her work in the film: "Ms. Spacek's performance is as devastating as it is unflashy. With the slight tightening of her neck muscles and a downward twitch of her mouth, she conveys her character's relentlessness, then balances it with enough sweetness to make Ruth seem entirely human. It is one of Ms. Spacek's greatest performances." Her performance as Ruth Fowler, a grieving mother consumed by revenge, won extraordinary praise and garnered the New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Actress and the Los Angeles Film Critics Association Award for Best Actress as well as the Critics' Choice Award for Best Actress, Golden Globe Award for Best Actress – Motion Picture Drama, and Independent Spirit Award for Best Female Lead, among many others.<ref name="Golden Globes 2002 / A night for the Aussies / 'Beautiful Mind,' 'Moulin Rouge,' cable TV take top Golden Globes"></ref>

With her 6th best actress Academy Award nomination, Spacek became only the 8th actress to be nominated for at least 6 leading role Oscars. Spacek is the most recent inductee to this list.

Other performances of this decade include unfaithful wife Ruth in Rodrigo García's "Nine Lives" (2005) and a turn as a woman suffering from Alzheimer's in the television movie "Pictures of Hollis Woods" (2007). In 2008, Spacek had a supporting part in the Christmas comedy "Four Christmases" and a lead role in the independent drama, "Lake City". Spacek appeared on the HBO drama "Big Love", for a multi-episode arc, as a powerful Washington, D.C. lobbyist.

In 2005, she narrated the audiobook of the original "Carrie" novel by Stephen King and, in 2006, she narrated the classic Harper Lee novel "To Kill a Mockingbird" (1960), which sold over 30 million copies. In 2011, she received a star on Hollywood's Walk of Fame. Spacek was featured in "The Help" (2011), directed by Tate Taylor, and along with the cast, was awarded with the Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Cast in a Motion Picture for their performance in the film.
In 2012, Spacek published a memoir, "My Extraordinary Ordinary Life", with co-author Maryanne Vollers. "The Washington Post" Jen Chaney called it "refreshingly down-to-earth" and "beautifully written". She also mentioned that Spacek's description of her childhood is so "evocative that one can almost taste the sour stalks of goatweed she chewed on steamy summer afternoons". Jay Stafford of "Richmond Times-Dispatch" pointed out that, unlike other actors' autobiographies, Spacek's "benefits from good writing and remarkable frankness". "The Austin Chronicle" Margaret Moser stated that Spacek's memoir is "as easy to read as it is a pleasure to digest". Joe Muscolino of the "Biographile" gave the book a 5 out of 5 rating, saying that it "does not disappoint". "Kirkus Reviews", however, was less appreciative of the book, calling it "an average memoir" and "overly detailed", while criticizing its lack of "narrative arc", but complimented Spacek for being "truly down-to-earth". It further criticized that "the book is 'ordinary' and does not have enough drama to engage readers not directly interested in Spacek and her work", and ended by saying that it's "for die-hard movie buffs and Spacek fans only".

Spacek became the first person to appear as an actor in a film nominated for the Academy Award for Best Picture in each of the four most recent decades. Each film appeared at or near the beginning of its decade: "Coal Miner's Daughter" (1980), "Missing" (1982), "JFK" (1991), "In the Bedroom" (2001), and "The Help" (2011).
Spacek married production designer and art director Jack Fisk in 1974, after they met on the set of "Badlands". Fisk later directed her in the films "Raggedy Man" (1981) and "Violets Are Blue" (1986). They have two daughters, Schuyler Fisk (born July 8, 1982) and Madison Fisk (born September 21, 1988). Schuyler Fisk is both an actress and a singer. In 1982, Spacek and her family moved to a farm near Charlottesville, Virginia.

Despite Spacek's lengthy career and recognition, she has managed to keep a low profile and is rarely a tabloid fixture. Various critics have praised her ability to maintain a private life in the public eye.



</doc>
<doc id="42621" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42621" title="Gwyneth Paltrow">
Gwyneth Paltrow

Gwyneth Kate Paltrow (, born September 27, 1972) is an American actress, singer, and food writer. Following early notice for her work in films such as "Seven" (1995), "Emma" (1996), "Sliding Doors" (1998) and "A Perfect Murder" (1998), Paltrow rose to worldwide recognition for her performance in "Shakespeare in Love" (1998), winning the Academy Award and the Golden Globe Award for Best Actress.

Her other film credits include "The Talented Mr. Ripley" (1999), "The Royal Tenenbaums" (2001), "Shallow Hal" (2001), and "Proof" (2005), for which she earned a Golden Globe nomination. Since 2008, Paltrow has portrayed Pepper Potts in the Marvel Cinematic Universe. She won a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Guest Actress in a Comedy Series in 2011 for her five-episode role as Holly Holliday on the Fox television series "Glee".

Paltrow has been the face of Estée Lauder's Pleasures perfume since 2005. She is also the face of American fashion brand Coach, owner of a lifestyle company, Goop, and author of two cookbooks.

Paltrow was born in Los Angeles, the daughter of actress Blythe Danner and film producer-director Bruce Paltrow (1943–2002). She has a younger brother, Jake Paltrow, who is a director and screenwriter. Paltrow's father was Jewish, while her mother is from a Christian background. She was raised celebrating "both Jewish and Christian holidays." Her brother had a traditional Bar Mitzvah when he turned 13. Her father's Ashkenazi Jewish family emigrated from Belarus and Poland, while her mother has Pennsylvania Dutch (German) and some English ancestry. Paltrow's paternal great-great-grandfather was a rabbi in Nowogród, Poland, and a descendant of the well known "Paltrowicz" family of rabbis from Kraków. Her half-cousin is actress Katherine Moennig (through her mother). She is a second cousin of former U.S. Congresswoman Gabrielle Giffords (AZ-08) (through her father). Her uncle is opera singer and actor Harry Danner, whose daughter, actress Hillary Danner, is Paltrow's cousin and close friend. Paltrow recalls their family gatherings: "Hillary and I always had this in common, and do to this day [...] cooking for people we love, eating, hanging out as a family. It's how we were raised. It's what we do." Another cousin is Rebekah Paltrow Neumann, whose spouse is the Israeli-American billionaire Adam Neumann, founder of WeWork.

Paltrow was raised in Santa Monica, where she attended Crossroads School, before enrolling in the Spence School, a private girls' school in New York City. Later, she briefly studied anthropology at the University of California, Santa Barbara, before dropping out to act. She is an "adopted daughter" of Talavera de la Reina (Spain), where at 15, she spent a year as an exchange student and learned to speak Spanish. She is also conversant in French.

Her acting debut was in "High" (1989), a TV film her father directed, and after spending several summers watching her mother perform at the Williamstown Theatre Festival in Massachusetts, Paltrow made her professional stage debut there in 1990. Her film debut followed with the musical romance film "Shout" (1991), starring John Travolta, and she was cast by Steven Spielberg in the commercially successful adventure feature "Hook" (1991) as the young Wendy Darling. Paltrow's next roles were in the made-for-television movies "Cruel Doubt" (1992) and "Deadly Relations" (1993). Her first plum feature film role was in the noir drama "Flesh and Bone" (1993) as the much-younger girlfriend of James Caan. Janet Maslin of "The New York Times" described Paltrow as a scene-stealer "who is Blythe Danner's daughter and has her mother's way of making a camera fall in love with her." In 1995, she starred in the thriller "Se7en", as the wife of a young detective (Brad Pitt), who is partnered with the retiring William Somerset (Morgan Freeman) and soon tasked with tracking down a serial killer who uses the seven deadly sins as tropes in his murders. The seventh-highest-grossing film in the year "Seven" also earned her a Satellite Award nomination. She appeared in "Moonlight and Valentino", as a grieving chain-smoker, and in "Jefferson in Paris", portraying Martha Jefferson Randolph.

In 1996, Paltrow played the title character in the period film adaptation "Emma", based on the 1815 novel of the same name by Jane Austen. Director Douglas McGrath decided to bring in Paltrow to audition for the part of Emma Woodhouse, after a suggestion from his agent and after seeing her performance in "Flesh and Bone". On his decision to cast the actress, McGrath revealed: "The thing that actually sold me on her playing a young English girl was that she did a perfect Texas accent. I know that wouldn't recommend her to most people [...] I knew she had theater training, so she could carry herself. We had many actresses, big and small, who wanted to play this part. The minute she started the read-through, the very first line, I thought, 'Everything is going to be fine; she's going to be brilliant.'" While she recovered from wisdom-tooth surgery, Paltrow had a month to herself do her own research for the part; she studied horsemanship, dancing, singing, archery and the "highly stylized" manners and dialect during a three-week rehearsal period. The film was released to critical acclaim and commercial success through arthouse cinemas. "Variety" proclaimed: "Gwyneth Paltrow shines brightly as Jane Austen's most endearing character, the disastrously self-assured matchmaker Emma Woodhouse. A fine cast, speedy pacing and playful direction make this a solid contender for the Austen sweepstakes."

1998 marked a turning point in Paltrow's career as she took on leading roles in five high-profile film releases in the year —"Great Expectations", "Sliding Doors", "Hush", "A Perfect Murder" and "Shakespeare in Love". In the adaptation of the Charles Dickens novel "Great Expectations", with Ethan Hawke, Robert De Niro, Anne Bancroft and Chris Cooper, she played the unrequited and haughty childhood love of a New York City painter. The British drama "Sliding Doors" saw her star as a woman whose life could take two central paths depending on whether or not she catches a train, causing different outcomes. "Great Expectations" and "Sliding Doors" both grossed over US$55 million worldwide. Paltrow starred opposite Jessica Lange in the thriller "Hush", as an unsuspecting woman living with her psychotic mother-in-law. The film made US$13.5 million domestically and was generally panned by critics. In another thriller, "A Perfect Murder", inspired by Alfred Hitchcock's 1954 film, "Dial M for Murder", Paltrow starred alongside Michael Douglas, playing Emily Taylor, who was based on Grace Kelly's character from the original film. Despite a mixed critical response towards "A Perfect Murder", the film grossed US$128 million globally. She was also considered for the role of Rose DeWitt Bukater in the 1997 film "Titanic".

Her most critically acclaimed role in the year was that of the fictional lover of William Shakespeare in "Shakespeare in Love", opposite Joseph Fiennes in the titular part. "Entertainment Weekly" commented, "Best of all is Gwyneth Paltrow, who, at long last, has a movie to star in that's as radiant as she is." "The New York Times" summed up her performance as Viola thus: "Gwyneth Paltrow, in her first great, fully realized starring performance, makes a heroine so breathtaking that she seems utterly plausible as the playwright's guiding light." "Shakespeare in Love" made US$289 million in box office receipts, and earned Paltrow the award for Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Leading Role from the Screen Actors Guild, the Golden Globe Award for Best Actress and the Academy Award for Best Actress, among other honors.
Her Pink Ralph Lauren dress worn at the 71st Academy Awards in collecting her Oscar was extremely popular and was credited for bringing pink back into fashion.

In 1999, Paltrow co-starred alongside Jude Law, Matt Damon and Cate Blanchett in the psychological thriller "The Talented Mr. Ripley", as the fiancée of a rich and spoiled millionaire playboy (Law) whose identity is adopted by a con artist (Damon). While "The Guardian", noting the "very underwritten" female roles in the story, found her to be "peaky and pallid", the film received positive reviews and earned $80 million in North America. She showcased her singing ability in 2000's "Duets", which was directed by her father and co-starred singer Huey Lewis. In the film, about "the little known world of karaoke competitions and the wayward characters who inhabit it", she portrayed the estranged daughter of a hustler (Lewis). She performed a cover version of Smokey Robinson's "Cruisin', which was released as a single and went to number one in Australia, while her rendition of the Kim Carnes classic "Bette Davis Eyes" reached number three. Also in 2000, Paltrow co-starred with Ben Affleck in the moderately successful romantic drama "Bounce" as Abby Janello.

She starred with Jack Black in the comedy "Shallow Hal" (2001), about a shallow man falling in love with an overweight woman. To play her role, she had to wear a specially designed 25-pound fatsuit and heavy make-up. "Shallow Hal" opened with US$22.5 million and grossed US$70.7 million in North America and US$141.1 million around the globe. Roger Ebert remarked that she was "truly touching" in the film, which he described as "often very funny, but [...] also surprisingly moving at times". In the Wes Anderson dramedy "The Royal Tenenbaums" (2001), co-starring Gene Hackman, Anjelica Huston, Ben Stiller and Luke Wilson, Paltrow took on the role of the adopted daughter in an estranged family of former child prodigies reuniting with their father. A positive critical response greeted the film upon it release, and it made US$71.4 million worldwide.

By 2004, it was observed that since the Oscar for "Shakespeare in Love", Paltrow's film career had been less noteworthy and critical acclaim had waned. She said she was unequipped for the pressure, leading to several bad movie choices, agreeing with peers who believe the win is, in some ways, a curse. During this time, Paltrow rarely appeared in films, having taken a hiatus to raise her two children. In "The Guardian", she said she divided her career into movies for love and films for money: "The Royal Tenenbaums", "Proof", and "Sylvia" fell into the former category, while she signed on to "View from the Top" and "Shallow Hal" for the latter.

In 2002, Paltrow made small appearances in the documentary "Searching for Debra Winger" and the action satire comedy "Austin Powers in Goldmember", while she starred in the thriller-drama "Possession" with Aaron Eckhart as a couple of literary scholars who unearth the amorous secret of two Victorian poets as they find themselves falling under a deepening connection. Critically panned, the film made a lukewarm US$14.8 million worldwide. In the following year, she headlined the romantic comedy "View from the Top", where she obtained the part of woman from a small town who sets out to fulfill her dream of becoming a flight attendant. Budgeted at US$30 million, the film only earned US$7 million in its opening weekend; it eventually grossed US$15.6 domestically and US$19,526,014 worldwide. She herself later disparaged the film, calling it "terrible". Paltrow starred as the titular role in "Sylvia" (2003), a British biographical drama directed by Christine Jeffs and co-starring Daniel Craig chronicling the romance between prominent poets Sylvia Plath and Ted Hughes. Distributed for a limited release in most markets, "Sylvia" made US$2.9 million internationally. "The New York Times", in its review for the film, wrote that "her performance goes well beyond mimicry. She has a vivid, passionate presence, even when her lively features have gone slack with depression and her bright blue eyes have glazed over".

In 2004, she starred with her "The Talented Mr. Ripley" co-star Jude Law and Angelina Jolie in the science-fiction film "Sky Captain and the World of Tomorrow". Her role in the film was Polly Perkins, a reporter for the fictional "New York Chronicle". Law became one of the producers of the film and used his clout to get Paltrow involved. Once she had been suggested for the role, Law did not remember "any other name coming up. It just seems that she was perfect. She was as enthusiastic about the script and about the visual references that were sort of put to her, and jumped on board." She said in an interview, "I thought that this is the time to do a movie like this where it's kind of breaking into new territory and it's not your basic formulaic action-adventure movie." While critical response was positive, with a budget of US$70 million, "Sky Captain" only grossed US$58 million at the international box office. Also in 2004, she was recognized as an outstanding woman in entertainment by Women in Film Los Angeles with the Crystal Award.

In the drama "Proof" (2005), she starred as the depressed daughter of a brilliant, eccentric mathematician (played by Anthony Hopkins). The film was based on the play of the same name, in which Paltrow also played the same character at London's Donmar Warehouse between May and June 2002. On her portrayal in the film version, "Eye for Film" remarked: "As she has already shown in "Sylvia", "The Royal Tenenbaums" and even "Sliding Doors", Paltrow has an uncanny talent for playing women who are coming apart at the seams and her [character] veers from lovably eccentric to more disturbingly unhinged and back again with fluent ease. The scenes, which she and Hopkins share, as two difficult people bound together by affection, dependency and mutual respect, are entirely believable and all the more touching for it". For her performance, Paltrow earned her second Golden Globe nomination for Best Actress – Motion Picture Drama.

Paltrow filmed small roles for the 2006 films "Love and Other Disasters", "Running With Scissors" and "Infamous", where she sang Cole Porter's "What Is This Thing Called Love?". Her brother Jake Paltrow directed her in his feature debut, the romantic comedy "The Good Night" (2007), in which she starred opposite Penélope Cruz, Martin Freeman, Danny DeVito and Simon Pegg as the wife of a former keyboard player (Freeman). The film received a two-theater run in North America and garnered mixed reviews from critics. "View London" felt the actress was "clearly only playing her part as a courtesy to her director brother and it just makes you wish she'd go back to playing lead roles again".

Paltrow saw a resurgence in her career in 2008, when she was cast in "Iron Man" as Pepper Potts, Tony Stark's personal assistant, closest friend, and budding love interest. First hesitant to appear in a big-budget project, Paltrow asked Marvel to send her any comics they would consider relevant to her understanding of the character, who she considered to be very smart, levelheaded, and grounded. She said she liked "the fact that there's a sexuality that's not blatant." Director Jon Favreau wanted Potts' and Stark's relationship to be reminiscent of a 1940s comedy, something which Paltrow considered to be fun in an "innocent yet sexy" way. "Iron Man" was favorably received by critics, and with a worldwide gross of US$585 million, it became Paltrow's highest-grossing film until "The Avengers" (2012). She reprised her role in the sequels "Iron Man 2" (2010) and "Iron Man 3" (2013). While the second film made US$623.9 million internationally, the third entry went on to gross US$1.215 billion. She also reprised the role in "" (2017).

Paltrow starred with Joaquin Phoenix in the romantic drama "Two Lovers" (2008), playing the beautiful but volatile new neighbor of a depressed bachelor. "Two Lovers" premiered in competition at the 2008 Cannes Film Festival in May, receiving largely positive reviews, especially for Phoenix and Paltrow's performances; "Los Angeles Times" felt that "Phoenix is at his best with Paltrow's bruised sparrow of a girl; he's desperate to take care of her when he can't even take care of himself. She is one of those actresses who understands the power of a look, and the one of regret and then resignation that overtakes her when Leonard professes his love is steeped in sadness". The film was an arthouse success, grossing US$16 million worldwide.

In the musical drama "Country Strong" (2010), she starred as an emotionally unstable country music star who attempts to resurrect her career. She recorded the song "Country Strong" for the film's soundtrack, and it was released to country radio stations in August 2010. The film received mediocre reviews and grossed a modest US$20.2 million in North America. The consensus of review aggregate Rotten Tomatoes was: "The cast gives it their all, and Paltrow handles her songs with aplomb, but "Country Strong"s cliched, disjointed screenplay hits too many bum notes". At the 83rd Academy Awards, Paltrow performed another song from the movie, "Coming Home," which was nominated for Best Original Song.

Paltrow obtained her first-ever role in a scripted television show, when she appeared in Fox's "Glee", as substitute teacher Holly Holliday, who fills in for Matthew Morrison's character when he falls ill. Her role was developed by co-creator Ryan Murphy, a personal friend of Paltrow's, who suggested that she showcase her vocal and dancing abilities ahead of the release of "Country Strong". In her first episode, "The Substitute," she sang "Nowadays" from the musical "Chicago" with Lea Michele, CeeLo Green's "Forget You", and a mash-up of "Singin' In the Rain" and Rihanna's "Umbrella" with Morrison and the rest of the cast. Her debut in "Glee" attracted significant buzz and positive commentary from critics; she earned a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Guest Actress in a Comedy Series. Indeed, at the time, "Entertainment Weekly" Tim Stack and "E! Online"s Kristin dos Santos called her appearance Emmy-worthy, with the former rating it among her best performances, and the latter stating that Holly received "some of "Glee" best-ever one-liners".

She later performed "Forget You" with CeeLo Green himself and several puppet characters provided by The Jim Henson Company at the 2011 Grammy Awards. She reprised her role twice more that season, performing "Do You Wanna Touch Me (Oh Yeah)" by Gary Glitter, an acoustic version of "Landslide" by Fleetwood Mac, "Kiss" by Prince, and Adele's "Turning Tables". Paltrow was briefly featured in "" after being filmed while she performed "Forget You" as Holly in the 2011 Glee Live! In Concert! tour performances of June 16 and 17, 2011. Afterwards in the year, Paltrow appeared in Steven Soderbergh's film "Contagion", featuring an ensemble cast consisting of Marion Cotillard, Kate Winslet and her "The Talented Mr. Ripley" co-stars Matt Damon and Jude Law. The thriller follows the rapid progress of a lethal indirect contact transmission virus that kills within days. Paltrow portrayed Elizabeth Emhoff, a "working mom" and one among the virus' first victims. "Contagion" received positive reviews and opened atop at the North American box office with US$23.1 million; it went on to gross US$75.6 million domestically and US$135.4 million worldwide.

She reprised her role of Pepper Potts in "The Avengers" (2012), which set numerous box office records, including the biggest opening weekend in North America; it grossed over $1.5 billion worldwide, emerging as Paltrow's most widely seen film. Also in 2012, she starred in the independent romantic dramedy "Thanks for Sharing", opposite Mark Ruffalo as people learning to face a challenging and confusing road as they struggle together against sex addiction. Distributed for a limited release in certain part of the United States, the film garnered mixed reviews and grossed US$1 million domestically. "Paste" magazine noted that her role "exhibits some of the same obsessive diet and exercise habits that Paltrow herself has been accused of—a kind of meta character trait that balances the power in [the main roles'] budding relationship". In April 2013, Paltrow was named "People" magazine's annual "Most Beautiful Woman".

In 2014, she had a two-episode arc in the improvised online series "Web Therapy", as Maya Ganesh, "a new-age caricature". In 2015, she starred in "Mortdecai", alongside Johnny Depp, Olivia Munn, and Paul Bettany. In it, she portrayed the wife of an unscrupulous art dealer and swindler (Depp). Budgeted at US$60 million, the film only grossed US$7.7 million in North America and US$47.3 million internationally. Paltrow was featured on the track "Everglow", which was included in Coldplay's seventh studio album "A Head Full of Dreams" (2015). In June 2017, Paltrow announced that she would take a break from acting to focus on her business "Goop", stating: "I’m still going to do a little bit here and there, but [the company] really requires almost all of my time".

Paltrow is a Save the Children artist ambassador, raising awareness about World Pneumonia Day. She is on the board of the Robin Hood Foundation, a charitable organization that works to alleviate poverty in New York City. In October 2014, she hosted a Democratic fundraiser attended by President Barack Obama at her private residence in Los Angeles.

In April 2009, Paltrow narrated "Brown Bear & Friends", the first of several children's audiobooks that she would narrate by Bill Martin. The "Brown Bear & Friends" audiobook received a Grammy nomination in 2009 for Best Spoken Word Album for Children. Since, she has also narrated Bill Martin's "Brown Bear, Brown Bear, What Do You See?", "Baby Bear, Baby Bear, What Do You See?", "Panda Bear, Panda Bear, What Do You See?", and "Polar Bear, Polar Bear, What Do You Hear?"

In May 2005, Paltrow became the face of Estée Lauder's Pleasures perfume. She appeared in Chicago on August 17, 2007, to sign bottles of the perfume, and on July 8, 2008, she promoted Lauder's Sensuous perfume in New York with the company's three other models. Estée Lauder donates a minimum of $500,000 of sales of items from the 'Pleasures Gwyneth Paltrow' collection to breast cancer research. In 2006, she became the face for Bean Pole International, a Korean fashion brand and in 2014, she partnered with Blo Blow Bar, teaming up with the brand's creative branch.

In September 2008, Paltrow launched the weekly lifestyle newsletter "Goop", encouraging readers to 'nourish the inner aspect'. Goop has expanded into a web-based company, Goop.com. According to Paltrow, the company's name "is a nickname, like my name is G.P., so that is really where it came from. And I wanted it to be a word that means nothing and could mean anything." Goop has expanded into e-commerce, collaborating with fashion brands, launching pop-up shops, launching a wellness summit, and a print magazine.

Goop, and by extension Paltrow, have drawn criticism by showcasing expensive products, and promoting medically and scientifically impossible treatments, some of which could be harmful. The controversies have included vaginal steaming, the use of jade eggs, a dangerous coffee enema device, and "Body Vibes", wearable stickers that were claimed to "rebalance the energy frequency in our bodies" and which Goop falsely claimed were made of a NASA-developed material. 

A brand analyst has noted how Goop's response to criticisms seems designed to "strengthen their brand and draw their customers closer", noting Goop's references to feminism, traditional Asian medicines and Eastern philosophies, and anti-establishment politics to do so.

In October 2007, Paltrow signed for the PBS television series "Spain... on the Road Again", which showcases the food and culture of Spain.

In 2008, Paltrow co-wrote the book "Spain... A Culinary Road Trip" with Mario Batali. In 2011, she wrote a book titled "My Father's Daughter: Delicious, Easy Recipes Celebrating Family and Togetherness". That same year she penned the book "Notes From the Kitchen Table". Two years later she published a book titled "It's All Good: Delicious Easy Recipes That Will Make You Look Good and Feel Great", which promoted an elimination diet which was noted to be unsupported by medical evidence. That year she wrote a foreword for a book by Ross Matthews, "Man Up! Tales of My Delusional Self-Confidence".

At the age of 24, Paltrow was engaged to actor Brad Pitt, whom she dated from 1994 to 1997. The engagement was called off, according to Paltrow, because she was not ready for marriage. Paltrow has since said that, as this was her first high-profile relationship with another celebrity, it taught her the need for public discretion about her romantic life.

Paltrow had an on-and-off three-year relationship with actor Ben Affleck from 1997 to late 2000. They first broke up in early 1999; soon after, Paltrow persuaded Affleck to star in the film "Bounce" with her. During the making of the film, the couple started dating again and eventually broke up in October 2000.

In October 2002, Paltrow met Chris Martin of the British rock band Coldplay backstage three weeks after the death of her father, Bruce Paltrow. They married on December 5, 2003, in a ceremony at a hotel in Southern California. Paltrow and Martin have two children together: daughter Apple Blythe Alison Martin (b. 2004) and son Moses Bruce Anthony Martin (b. 2006). Paltrow explained Apple's unusual first name on "Oprah", saying: "It sounded so sweet and it conjured such a lovely picture for me – you know, apples are so sweet and they're wholesome and it's biblical – and I just thought it sounded so lovely and ... clean! And I just thought, 'Perfect!'." She explained her son's first name came from the song, "Moses", that her husband wrote for her before their wedding.

Paltrow cut down on work after becoming a mother. She also suffered from postpartum depression after the 2006 birth of her son. In March 2014, Paltrow announced that she and Martin had separated after ten years of marriage, describing the process as "conscious uncoupling". In April 2015, Paltrow filed for divorce from Chris Martin. A judge finalized their divorce on July 14, 2016. Paltrow has been dating producer Brad Falchuk, whom she met on the set of "Glee", since 2014. The couple went public with their relationship in April 2015 at a birthday party after months of speculation. On January 8, 2018, Paltrow and Falchuk announced they had become engaged.

As of 2013, Paltrow practiced Transcendental Meditation.

In 2017, Paltrow said that during the filming of the 1996 movie "Emma", she had been the recipient of unwanted sexual advances by producer Harvey Weinstein. She confided in Pitt, who confronted Weinstein at an industry event. Weinstein later warned Paltrow not to tell anyone else.




</doc>
<doc id="52139" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52139" title="Audrey Hepburn">
Audrey Hepburn

Audrey Hepburn (; born Audrey Kathleen Ruston; May 4, 1929 – January 20, 1993) was a British actress, model, dancer and humanitarian. Recognised as a film and fashion icon, Hepburn was active during Hollywood's Golden Age. She was ranked by the American Film Institute as the third-greatest female screen legend in Golden Age Hollywood and was inducted into the International Best Dressed List Hall of Fame.

Born in Ixelles, a district of Brussels, Hepburn spent her childhood between Belgium, England and the Netherlands. In Amsterdam, she studied ballet with Sonia Gaskell before moving to London in 1948, continuing her ballet training with Marie Rambert, and then performing as a chorus girl in West End musical theatre productions. Following minor appearances in several films, Hepburn starred in the 1951 Broadway play "Gigi" after being spotted by French novelist Colette, on whose work the play was based. 

She shot to stardom for playing the lead role in "Roman Holiday" (1953), for which she was the first actress to win an Academy Award, a Golden Globe Award and a BAFTA Award for a single performance. That same year, Hepburn won a Tony Award for Best Lead Actress in a Play for her performance in "Ondine". She went on to star in a number of successful films, such as "Sabrina" (1954), "The Nun's Story" (1959), "Breakfast at Tiffany's" (1961), "Charade" (1963), "My Fair Lady" (1964) and "Wait Until Dark" (1967), for which she also received Academy Award, Golden Globe and BAFTA nominations. Hepburn won three BAFTA Awards for Best British Actress in a Leading Role. In recognition of her film career, she was awarded the Lifetime Achievement Award from BAFTA, the Golden Globe Cecil B. DeMille Award, the Screen Actors Guild Life Achievement Award and the Special Tony Award. She remains one of the 12 people who have won Academy, Emmy, Grammy and Tony Awards.

Hepburn appeared in fewer films as her life went on, devoting much of her later life to UNICEF. She had contributed to the organisation since 1954, then worked in some of the poorest communities of Africa, South America and Asia between 1988 and 1992. In December 1992, George H. W. Bush, the 41st President of the United States, awarded her the Presidential Medal of Freedom in recognition of her work as a UNICEF Goodwill Ambassador. A month later, on January 20, 1993, Hepburn died of appendiceal cancer at her home in Tolochenaz, Vaud, Switzerland at the age of 63. 

Audrey Hepburn was born Audrey Kathleen Ruston or Edda Kathleen Hepburn-Ruston on May 4, 1929 at number 48 Rue Keyenveld in Ixelles, Brussels, Belgium.

Her father, Joseph Victor Anthony Ruston (21 November 188916 October 1980), was a British subject born in Auschitz, Bohemia, Austria-Hungary. He was the son of Victor John George Ruston, of British and Austrian descent and Anna Wels, of Austrian descent. In 1923-24, Joseph had briefly been an honorary British consul in Samarang in the Dutch East Indies and prior to his marriage to Hepburn's mother he had been married to Cornelia Bisschop, a Dutch heiress. Although born with the surname Ruston, he later double-barrelled his name to the more "aristocratic" Hepburn-Ruston, mistakenly believing himself descended from James Hepburn, third husband of Mary, Queen of Scots.

Hepburn's mother, Baroness Ella van Heemstra (12 June 190026 August 1984), was a Dutch noblewoman. She was the daughter of Baron Aarnoud van Heemstra, who served as mayor of Arnhem from 1910 to 1920 and as Governor of Dutch Suriname from 1921 to 1928, and Baroness Elbrig Willemine Henriette van Asbeck (1873–1939). At the age of nineteen, Ella had married Jonkheer Hendrik Gustaaf Adolf Quarles van Ufford, an oil executive based in Batavia, Dutch East Indies, where they subsequently lived. They had two sons, Jonkheer Arnoud Robert Alexander Quarles van Ufford (1920–1979) and Jonkheer Ian Edgar Bruce Quarles van Ufford (1924–2010), before divorcing in 1925.

Hepburn's parents were married in Batavia in September 1926. At the time, Ruston worked for a trading company, but soon after the marriage, the couple relocated to Europe, where he began working for a loan company. After a year in London, they moved to Brussels, where he had been assigned to open a branch office. After three years spent travelling between Brussels, Arnhem, The Hague and London, the family settled in the suburban Brussels municipality of Linkebeek in 1932. Hepburn's early childhood was sheltered and privileged. As a result of her multinational background and travelling with her family due to her father's job, she learned to speak five languages: Dutch and English from her parents, and later varying degrees of French, Spanish, and Italian.

In the mid-1930s, Hepburn's parents recruited and collected donations for the British Union of Fascists. Joseph left the family abruptly in 1935 and moved to London, where he became more deeply involved in Fascist activity and never visited his daughter abroad. Hepburn later professed that her father's departure was "the most traumatic event of my life". That same year, her mother moved with Hepburn to her family's estate in Arnhem. Sometime in 1937, Ella and Hepburn moved to Kent, England, where Hepburn was educated at a small independent school in Elham.

Hepburn's parents officially divorced in 1938. In the 1960s, Hepburn renewed contact with her father after locating him in Dublin through the Red Cross; although he remained emotionally detached, Hepburn supported him financially until his death.

After Britain declared war on Germany in September 1939, Hepburn's mother relocated her daughter back to Arnhem in the hope that, as during the First World War, the Netherlands would remain neutral and be spared a German attack. While there, Hepburn attended the Arnhem Conservatory from 1939 to 1945. She had begun taking ballet lessons during her last years at boarding school, and continued training in Arnhem under the tutelage of Winja Marova, becoming her "star pupil". After the Germans invaded the Netherlands in 1940, Hepburn used the name Edda van Heemstra, because an "English-sounding" name was considered dangerous during the German occupation. Her family was profoundly affected by the occupation, with Hepburn later stating that "had we known that we were going to be occupied for five years, we might have all shot ourselves. We thought it might be over next week ... six months ... next year ... that's how we got through". In 1942, her uncle, Otto van Limburg Stirum (husband of her mother's older sister, Miesje), was executed in retaliation for an act of sabotage by the resistance movement; while he had not been involved in the act, he was targeted due to his family's prominence in Dutch society. Hepburn's half-brother Ian was deported to Berlin to work in a German labour camp, and her other half-brother Alex went into hiding to avoid the same fate.

After her uncle's death, Hepburn, Ella and Miesje left Arnhem to live with her grandfather, Baron Aarnoud van Heemstra, in nearby Velp. Around that time Hepburn performed silent dance performances in order to raise money for the Dutch resistance effort. It was long believed that she participated in the Dutch resistance itself, but in 2016 the Airborne Museum 'Hartenstein' reported that after extensive research it had not found any evidence of such activities. In addition to other traumatic events, she witnessed the transportation of Dutch Jews to concentration camps, later stating that "more than once I was at the station seeing trainloads of Jews being transported, seeing all these faces over the top of the wagon. I remember, very sharply, one little boy standing with his parents on the platform, very pale, very blond, wearing a coat that was much too big for him, and he stepped on the train. I was a child observing a child."

After the Allied landing on D-Day, living conditions grew worse and Arnhem was subsequently heavily damaged during Operation Market Garden. During the Dutch famine that followed in the winter of 1944, the Germans blocked the resupply routes of the Dutch people's already-limited food and fuel supplies as retaliation for railway strikes that were held to hinder German occupation. Like others, Hepburn's family resorted to making flour out of tulip bulbs to bake cakes and biscuits; she developed acute anemia, respiratory problems and edema as a result of malnutrition. The van Heemstra family was also seriously financially affected by the occupation, during which many of their properties, including their principal estate in Arnhem, were badly damaged or destroyed.

After the war ended in 1945, Hepburn moved with her mother and siblings to Amsterdam, where she began ballet training under Sonia Gaskell, a leading figure in Dutch ballet, and Russian Olga Tarassova.

As the family's fortunes had been lost during the war, Ella supported them by working as a cook and housekeeper for a wealthy family. Hepburn made her film debut in 1948, playing an air stewardess in "Dutch in Seven Lessons", an educational travel film made by Charles van der Linden and Henry Josephson.

Later that year, Hepburn moved to London to take up a ballet scholarship with Ballet Rambert, which was then based in Notting Hill. She supported herself with part-time work as a model, and dropped "Ruston" from her surname. After she was told by Rambert that despite her talent, her height and weak constitution (the after-effect of wartime malnutrition) would make the status of prima ballerina unattainable, she decided to concentrate on acting.

While Ella worked in menial jobs to support them, Hepburn appeared as a chorus girl in the West End musical theatre revues "High Button Shoes" (1948) at the London Hippodrome, and Cecil Landeau's "Sauce Tartare" (1949) and "Sauce Piquante" (1950) at the Cambridge Theatre. During her theatrical work, she took elocution lessons with actor Felix Aylmer to develop her voice.
After being spotted by a casting director while performing in "Sauce Piquante", Hepburn was registered as a freelance actress with the Associated British Picture Corporation. She appeared in the BBC Teleplay "The Silent Village", as well as minor roles in the 1951 films "One Wild Oat", "Laughter in Paradise", "Young Wives' Tale" and "The Lavender Hill Mob", before being cast in her first major supporting role in Thorold Dickinson's "The Secret People" (1952), in which she played a prodigious ballerina, performing all of her own dancing sequences.

Hepburn was then offered a small role in a film being shot in both English and French, "Monte Carlo Baby" (French: "Nous Irons à Monte Carlo", 1952), which was filmed in Monte Carlo. Coincidentally, French novelist Colette was at the Hôtel de Paris in Monte Carlo during the filming, and decided to cast Hepburn in the title role in the Broadway play "Gigi". Hepburn went into rehearsals having never spoken on stage and required private coaching. When "Gigi" opened at the Fulton Theatre on 24 November 1951, she received praise for her performance, despite criticism that the stage version was inferior to the French film adaptation. "Life" called her a "hit", while "The New York Times" stated that "her quality is so winning and so right that she is the success of the evening". She also received a Theatre World Award for the role. The play ran for 219 performances, closing on 31 May 1952, before going on tour which began 13 October 1952 in Pittsburgh and visited Cleveland, Chicago, Detroit, Washington D.C. and Los Angeles before closing on 16 May 1953 in San Francisco.

Hepburn had her first starring role in "Roman Holiday" (1953), playing Princess Ann, a European princess who, while escaping the reins of royalty, falls in love with an American newsman (Gregory Peck). Its producers initially wanted Elizabeth Taylor for the role, but director William Wyler was so impressed by Hepburn's screen test that he cast her instead. Wyler later commented, "She had everything I was looking for: charm, innocence, and talent. She also was very funny. She was absolutely enchanting and we said, 'That's the girl! Originally, the film was to have had only Gregory Peck's name above its title, with "Introducing Audrey Hepburn" beneath in smaller font. However, Peck suggested to Wyler that he elevate her to equal billing so that her name appeared before the title and in type as large as his: "You've got to change that because she'll be a big star and I'll look like a big jerk."

The film was a box office success, and Hepburn gained critical acclaim for her portrayal, unexpectedly winning an Academy Award for Best Actress, a BAFTA Award for Best British Actress in a Leading Role, and a Golden Globe Award for Best Actress – Motion Picture Drama in 1953. In his review in "The New York Times", A. H. Weiler wrote: "Although she is not precisely a newcomer to films Audrey Hepburn, the British actress who is being starred for the first time as Princess Anne, is a slender, elfin and wistful beauty, alternately regal and childlike in her profound appreciation of newly-found, simple pleasures and love. Although she bravely smiles her acknowledgement of the end of that affair, she remains a pitifully lonely figure facing a stuffy future."

Hepburn was signed to a seven-picture contract with Paramount with 12 months in between films to allow her time for stage work. She was featured on 7 September 1953 cover of "TIME" magazine, and also became noted for her personal style. Following her success in "Roman Holiday", Hepburn starred in Billy Wilder's romantic Cinderella-story comedy "Sabrina" (1954), in which wealthy brothers (Humphrey Bogart and William Holden) compete for the affections of their chauffeur's innocent daughter (Hepburn). For her performance, she was nominated for the 1954 Academy Award for Best Actress while winning the BAFTA Award for Best Actress in a Leading Role the same year. Bosley Crowther of "The New York Times" stated that she was "a young lady of extraordinary range of sensitive and moving expressions within such a frail and slender frame. She is even more luminous as the daughter and pet of the servants' hall than she was as a princess last year, and no more than that can be said."

Hepburn also returned to the stage in 1954, playing a water spirit who falls in love with a human in the fantasy play "Ondine" on Broadway. A "New York Times" critic commented that "somehow Miss Hepburn is able to translate [its intangibles] into the language of the theatre without artfulness or precociousness. She gives a pulsing performance that is all grace and enchantment, disciplined by an instinct for the realities of the stage". Her performance won her the 1954 Tony Award for Best Performance by a Leading Actress in a Play the same year she won the Academy Award for "Roman Holiday", making her one of three actresses to receive the Academy and Tony Awards for Best Actress in the same year (the other two are Shirley Booth and Ellen Burstyn). During the production, Hepburn and her co-star Mel Ferrer began a relationship, and were married on 25 September 1954 in Switzerland.

Although she appeared in no new film releases in 1955, Hepburn received the Golden Globe for World Film Favorite that year. Having become one of Hollywood's most popular box-office attractions, she went on to star in a series of successful films during the remainder of the decade, including her BAFTA- and Golden Globe-nominated role as Natasha Rostova in "War and Peace" (1956), an adaptation of the Tolstoy novel set during the Napoleonic wars, starring Henry Fonda and her husband Mel Ferrer. In 1957, she exhibited her dancing abilities in her debut musical film, "Funny Face" (1957) wherein Fred Astaire, a fashion photographer, discovers a beatnik bookstore clerk (Hepburn) who, lured by a free trip to Paris, becomes a beautiful model. The same year Hepburn starred in another romantic comedy, "Love in the Afternoon", alongside Gary Cooper and Maurice Chevalier.

Hepburn played Sister Luke in "The Nun's Story" (1959), which focuses on the character's struggle to succeed as a nun, alongside co-star Peter Finch. The role produced a third Academy Award nomination for Hepburn and earned her a second BAFTA Award. A review in "Variety" read, "Hepburn has her most demanding film role, and she gives her finest performance", while "Films in Review" stated that her performance "will forever silence those who have thought her less an actress than a symbol of the sophisticated child/woman. Her portrayal of Sister Luke is one of the great performances of the screen." Reportedly, she spent hours in convents and with members of the Church to bring truth to her portrayal, stating that she "gave more time, energy and thought to this than to any of my previous screen performances."

Following "The Nun's Story", Hepburn received a lukewarm reception for starring with Anthony Perkins in the romantic adventure "Green Mansions" (1959), in which she played Rima, a jungle girl who falls in love with a Venezuelan traveller, and "The Unforgiven" (1960), her only western film, in which she appeared opposite Burt Lancaster and Lillian Gish in a story of racism against a group of Native Americans.

Hepburn next starred as New York call girl Holly Golightly in Blake Edwards's "Breakfast at Tiffany's" (1961), a film loosely based on the Truman Capote novella of the same name. Capote disapproved of many changes that were made to sanitise the story for the film adaptation, and would have preferred Marilyn Monroe to have been cast in the role, although he also stated that Hepburn "did a terrific job". The character is considered one of the best-known in American cinema, and a defining role for Hepburn. The dress she wears during the opening credits is considered an icon of the twentieth century and perhaps the most famous "little black dress" of all time. Hepburn stated that the role was "the jazziest of my career" yet admitted: "I'm an introvert. Playing the extroverted girl was the hardest thing I ever did." She was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Actress for her performance.
The same year, Hepburn also starred in William Wyler's controversial drama "The Children's Hour" (1961), in which she and Shirley MacLaine played teachers whose lives become troubled after a student accuses them of being lesbians. Due to the social mores of the time, the film and Hepburn's performance went largely unmentioned, both critically and commercially. Bosley Crowther of "The New York Times" opined that the film "is not too well acted" with the exception of Hepburn who "gives the impression of being sensitive and pure" of its "muted theme", while "Variety" magazine also complimented Hepburn's "soft sensitivity, mar-velous projection and emotional understatement" adding that Hepburn and MacLaine "beautifully complement each other".
Hepburn next appeared opposite Cary Grant in the comic thriller "Charade" (1963), playing a young widow pursued by several men who chase the fortune stolen by her murdered husband. The 59-year-old Grant, who had previously withdrawn from the starring male lead roles in "Roman Holiday" and "Sabrina", was sensitive about his age difference with 34-year-old Hepburn, and was uncomfortable about the romantic interplay. To satisfy his concerns, the filmmakers agreed to change the screenplay so that Hepburn's character romantically pursued his. The film turned out to be a positive experience for him, stating that "All I want for Christmas is another picture with Audrey Hepburn." The role earned Hepburn her third and final competitive BAFTA Award and another Golden Globe nomination. Critic Bosley Crowther was less kind to her performance, stating that "Hepburn is cheerfully committed to a mood of how-nuts-can-you-be in an obviously comforting assortment of expensive Givenchy costumes."

Hepburn reteamed with her "Sabrina" co-star William Holden in "Paris When It Sizzles" (1964), a screwball comedy in which she played the young assistant of a Hollywood screenwriter, who aids his writer's block by acting out his fantasies of possible plots. Its production was troubled by a number of problems. Holden unsuccessfully tried to rekindle a romance with the now-married Hepburn, and his alcoholism was beginning to affect his work. After principal photography began, she demanded the dismissal of cinematographer Claude Renoir after seeing what she felt were unflattering dailies. Superstitious, she also insisted on dressing room 55 because that was her lucky number and required that Givenchy, her long-time designer, be given a credit in the film for her perfume. Dubbed "marshmallow-weight hokum" by "Variety" upon its release in April, the film was "uniformly panned" but critics were kinder to Hepburn's performance, describing her as "a refreshingly individual creature in an era of the exaggerated curve".

Hepburn's second film of 1964 was George Cukor's film adaptation of the stage musical "My Fair Lady", released in November. "Soundstage" wrote that "not since "Gone with the Wind" has a motion picture created such universal excitement as "My Fair Lady"", yet Hepburn's casting in the role of Cockney flower girl Eliza Doolittle sparked controversy. Julie Andrews, who had originated the role in the stage show, had not been offered the part because producer Jack L. Warner thought Hepburn or Elizabeth Taylor were more "bankable" propositions. Hepburn initially asked Warner to give the role to Andrews but was eventually cast. Further friction was created when, although non-singer Hepburn had sung in "Funny Face" and had lengthy vocal preparation for the role in "My Fair Lady", her vocals were dubbed by Marni Nixon as the songs were not written for her vocal range. Hepburn was initially upset and walked off the set when informed.

The press further played up the fabricated rivalry between Hepburn and Andrews, when the latter won an Academy Award for "Mary Poppins" at the 37th Academy Awards (1964) but Hepburn was not even nominated, despite "My Fair Lady's" accumulation of eight out of a possible twelve awards. Regardless, critics greatly applauded Hepburn's "exquisite" performance. Crowther wrote that "the happiest thing about ["My Fair Lady"] is that Audrey Hepburn superbly justifies the decision of Jack Warner to get her to play the title role." Gene Ringgold of "Soundstage" also commented that "Audrey Hepburn is magnificent. She is Eliza for the ages", while adding, "Everyone agreed that if Julie Andrews was not to be in the film, Audrey Hepburn was the perfect choice."

As the decade carried on, Hepburn appeared in an assortment of genres including the heist comedy "How to Steal a Million" (1966) where she played the daughter of a famous art collector, whose collection consists entirely of forgeries. Fearing her father's exposure, she sets out to steal one of his priceless statues with the help of a man played by Peter O'Toole. It was followed by two films in 1967. The first was "Two for the Road", a non-linear and innovative British dramedy that traces the course of a couple's troubled marriage. Director Stanley Donen said that Hepburn was more free and happy than he had ever seen her, and he credited that to co-star Albert Finney. The second, "Wait Until Dark", is a suspense thriller in which Hepburn demonstrated her acting range by playing the part of a terrorised blind woman. Filmed on the brink of her divorce, it was a difficult film for her, as husband Mel Ferrer was its producer. She lost fifteen pounds under the stress, but she found solace in co-star Richard Crenna and director Terence Young. Hepburn earned her fifth and final competitive Academy Award nomination for Best Actress; Bosley Crowther affirmed, "Hepburn plays the poignant role, the quickness with which she changes and the skill with which she manifests terror attract sympathy and anxiety to her and give her genuine solidity in the final scenes."

After 1967, Hepburn chose to devote more time to her family and acted only occasionally in the following decades. She attempted a comeback in 1976, playing Maid Marian in the period piece "Robin and Marian" with Sean Connery co-starring as Robin Hood, which was moderately successful. In 1979, Hepburn reunited with director Terence Young in the production of "Bloodline", sharing top-billing with Ben Gazzara, James Mason and Romy Schneider. The film, an international intrigue amid the jet-set, was a critical and box-office failure. Hepburn's last starring role in a feature film was opposite Gazzara in the comedy "They All Laughed" (1981), directed by Peter Bogdanovich. The film was overshadowed by the murder of one of its stars, Dorothy Stratten, and received only a limited release. Six years later, Hepburn co-starred with Robert Wagner in a made-for-television caper film, "Love Among Thieves" (1987).

After finishing her last motion picture role in 1988—a cameo appearance as an angel in Steven Spielberg's "Always"—Hepburn completed only two more entertainment-related projects, both critically acclaimed. "Gardens of the World with Audrey Hepburn" was a PBS documentary series, which was filmed on location in seven countries in the spring and summer of 1990. A one-hour special preceded it in March 1991, and the series itself began airing the day after her death, 21 January 1993. For the debut episode, Hepburn was posthumously awarded the 1993 Emmy Award for Outstanding Individual Achievement – Informational Programming. The other project was a spoken word album, "Audrey Hepburn's Enchanted Tales", which features readings of classic children's stories and was recorded in 1992. It earned her a posthumous Grammy Award for Best Spoken Word Album for Children.

In the 1950s, Hepburn narrated two radio programmes for UNICEF, re-telling children's stories of war. In 1989, Hepburn was appointed a Goodwill Ambassador of UNICEF. On her appointment, she stated that she was grateful for receiving international aid after enduring the German occupation as a child, and wanted to show her gratitude to the organisation.

Hepburn's first field mission for UNICEF was to Ethiopia in 1988. She visited an orphanage in Mek'ele that housed 500 starving children and had UNICEF send food. Of the trip, she said,
"I have a broken heart. I feel desperate. I can't stand the idea that two million people are in imminent danger of starving to death, many of them children, [and] not because there isn't tons of food sitting in the northern port of Shoa. It can't be distributed. Last spring, Red Cross and UNICEF workers were ordered out of the northern provinces because of two simultaneous civil wars... I went into rebel country and saw mothers and their children who had walked for ten days, even three weeks, looking for food, settling onto the desert floor into makeshift camps where they may die. Horrible. That image is too much for me. The 'Third World' is a term I don't like very much, because we're all one world. I want people to know that the largest part of humanity is suffering."

In August 1988 Hepburn went to Turkey on an immunisation campaign. She called Turkey "the loveliest example" of UNICEF's capabilities. Of the trip, she said "the army gave us their trucks, the fishmongers gave their wagons for the vaccines, and once the date was set, it took ten days to vaccinate the whole country. Not bad." In October, Hepburn went to South America. Of her experiences in Venezuela and Ecuador, Hepburn told the United States Congress, "I saw tiny mountain communities, slums, and shantytowns receive water systems for the first time by some miracle – and the miracle is UNICEF. I watched boys build their own schoolhouse with bricks and cement provided by UNICEF."

Hepburn toured Central America in February 1989, and met with leaders in Honduras, El Salvador, and Guatemala. In April, she visited Sudan with Wolders as part of a mission called "Operation Lifeline". Because of civil war, food from aid agencies had been cut off. The mission was to ferry food to southern Sudan. Hepburn said, "I saw but one glaring truth: These are not natural disasters but man-made tragedies for which there is only one man-made solution – peace." In October 1989, Hepburn and Wolders went to Bangladesh. John Isaac, a UN photographer, said, "Often the kids would have flies all over them, but she would just go hug them. I had never seen that. Other people had a certain amount of hesitation, but she would just grab them. Children would just come up to hold her hand, touch her – she was like the Pied Piper."

In October 1990 Hepburn went to Vietnam, in an effort to collaborate with the government for national UNICEF-supported immunisation and clean water programmes. In September 1992, four months before she died, Hepburn went to Somalia. Calling it "apocalyptic", she said, "I walked into a nightmare. I have seen famine in Ethiopia and Bangladesh, but I have seen nothing like this – so much worse than I could possibly have imagined. I wasn't prepared for this." Though scarred by what she had seen, Hepburn still had hope. "Taking care of children has nothing to do with politics. I think perhaps with time, instead of there being a politicisation of humanitarian aid, there will be a humanisation of politics."

United States president George H. W. Bush presented Hepburn with the Presidential Medal of Freedom in recognition of her work with UNICEF, and the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences posthumously awarded her the Jean Hersholt Humanitarian Award for her contribution to humanity. 

In 2002, at the United Nations Special Session on Children, UNICEF honoured Hepburn's legacy of humanitarian work by unveiling a statue, "The Spirit of Audrey", at UNICEF's New York headquarters. Her service for children is also recognised through the US Fund for UNICEF's Audrey Hepburn Society.

In 1952, Hepburn became engaged to James Hanson, whom she had known since her early days in London. She called it "love at first sight", but after having her wedding dress fitted and the date set, she decided the marriage would not work because the demands of their careers would keep them apart most of the time. She issued a public statement about her decision, saying "When I get married, I want to be "really" married". In the early 1950s, she also dated future "Hair" producer Michael Butler.

At a cocktail party hosted by mutual friend Gregory Peck, Hepburn met American actor Mel Ferrer, and suggested that they star together in a play. The meeting led them to collaborate in "Ondine", during which they began a relationship. Eight months later, on 25 September 1954, they were married in Bürgenstock, Switzerland, while preparing to star together in the film "War and Peace" (1955).

Hepburn had two miscarriages, one in March 1955, and another in 1959, after she fell from a horse during the filming of "The Unforgiven" (1960). When she became pregnant for the third time, she took a year off work to prevent miscarriage; their son, Sean Hepburn Ferrer, was born on 17 July 1960. She had two more miscarriages in 1965 and 1967.

Despite the insistence from gossip columns that their marriage would not last, Hepburn claimed that she and Ferrer were inseparable and happy together, though she admitted that he had a bad temper. Ferrer was rumoured to be too controlling, and had been referred to by others as being her "Svengali" – an accusation that Hepburn laughed off. William Holden was quoted as saying, "I think Audrey allows Mel to think he influences her." After a 14-year marriage, the couple divorced in 1968.
Hepburn met her second husband, Italian psychiatrist Andrea Dotti, on a Mediterranean cruise with friends in June 1968. She believed she would have more children and possibly stop working. They married on 18 January 1969; their son, Luca Dotti, was born on 8 February 1970. While pregnant with Luca in 1969, Hepburn was more careful, resting for months before delivering the baby via caesarean section. She wanted to have a third child, but had another miscarriage in 1974. Dotti was unfaithful and she had a romantic relationship with actor Ben Gazzara during the filming of the 1979 movie "Bloodline". The Dotti-Hepburn marriage lasted thirteen years and was dissolved in 1982.

From 1980 until her death, Hepburn was in a relationship with Dutch actor Robert Wolders, the widower of actress Merle Oberon. She had met Wolders through a friend during the later years of her second marriage. In 1989, she called the nine years she had spent with him the happiest years of her life, and stated that she considered them married, just not officially.

Upon returning from Somalia to Switzerland in late September 1992, Hepburn began suffering from abdominal pain. While initial medical tests in Switzerland had inconclusive results, a laparoscopy performed at the Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles in early November revealed a rare form of abdominal cancer belonging to a group of cancers known as pseudomyxoma peritonei. Having grown slowly over several years, the cancer had metastasised as a thin coating over her small intestine. After surgery, Hepburn began chemotherapy.

Hepburn and her family returned home to Switzerland to celebrate her last Christmas. As she was still recovering from surgery, she was unable to fly on commercial aircraft. Her longtime friend, fashion designer Hubert de Givenchy, arranged for socialite Rachel Lambert "Bunny" Mellon to send her private Gulfstream jet, filled with flowers, to take Hepburn from Los Angeles to Geneva. She spent her last days in hospice care at her home in Tolochenaz, Vaud and was occasionally well enough to take walks in her garden, but gradually became more confined to bedrest.

On the evening of 20 January 1993, Hepburn died in her sleep at home. After her death, Gregory Peck went on camera and tearfully recited her favourite poem, "Unending Love" by Rabindranath Tagore. Funeral services were held at the village church of Tolochenaz on 24 January 1993. Maurice Eindiguer, the same pastor who wed Hepburn and Mel Ferrer and baptised her son Sean in 1960, presided over her funeral, while Prince Sadruddin Aga Khan of UNICEF delivered a eulogy. Many family members and friends attended the funeral, including her sons, partner Robert Wolders, half-brother Ian Quarles van Ufford, ex-husbands Andrea Dotti and Mel Ferrer, Hubert de Givenchy, executives of UNICEF, and fellow actors Alain Delon and Roger Moore. Flower arrangements were sent to the funeral by Gregory Peck, Elizabeth Taylor, and the Dutch royal family.
Later on the same day, Hepburn was interred at the Tolochenaz Cemetery. 

In her will, she appointed her two sons as co-equal heirs to her estate, subject to various bequests of her most precious jewels to her closest family and friends. To Robert Wolders, her long-time companion, she left two silver candlesticks which were worth about 500 CHF (Swiss Francs) at the time (1993). Hubert de Givenchy was named executor of her estate, along with her two Swiss attorneys.

Audrey Hepburn's legacy has endured long after her death. The American Film Institute named Hepburn third among the Greatest Female Stars of All Time. She is one of few entertainers who have won Academy, Emmy, Grammy and Tony Awards. She won a record three BAFTA Awards for Best British Actress in a Leading Role. In her last years, she remained a visible presence in the film world. She received a tribute from the Film Society of Lincoln Center in 1991 and was a frequent presenter at the Academy Awards. She received the BAFTA Lifetime Achievement Award in 1992. She was the recipient of numerous posthumous awards including the 1993 Jean Hersholt Humanitarian Award and competitive Grammy and Emmy Awards. She has been the subject of many biographies since her death including the 2000 dramatisation of her life titled "The Audrey Hepburn Story" which starred Jennifer Love Hewitt and Emmy Rossum as the older and younger Hepburn respectively. In January 2009, Hepburn was named on "The Times"’ list of the top 10 British actresses of all time.
Hepburn's image is widely used in advertising campaigns across the world. In Japan, a series of commercials used colourised and digitally enhanced clips of Hepburn in "Roman Holiday" to advertise Kirin black tea. In the United States, Hepburn was featured in a 2006 Gap commercial which used clips of her dancing from "Funny Face", set to AC/DC's "Back in Black", with the tagline "It's Back – The Skinny Black Pant". To celebrate its "Keep it Simple" campaign, the Gap made a sizeable donation to the Audrey Hepburn Children's Fund. In 2012, Hepburn was among the British cultural icons selected by artist Sir Peter Blake to appear in a new version of his most famous artwork – the Beatles' "Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band" album cover – to celebrate the British cultural figures of his life that he most admires. In 2013, a computer-manipulated representation of Hepburn was used in a television advert for the British chocolate bar Galaxy. On 4 May 2014, Google featured a doodle on its homepage on what would have been Hepburn's 85th birthday.
Sean Ferrer founded the Audrey Hepburn Children's Fund in memory of his mother shortly after her death. The US Fund for UNICEF also founded the Audrey Hepburn Society: chaired by Luca Dotti, it celebrates UNICEF's biggest donors and has raised almost US$100,000,000 to date. Dotti also became patron of the Pseudomyxoma Survivor charity, dedicated to providing support to patients of the rare cancer Hepburn suffered from, pseudomyxoma peritonei, and the rare disease ambassador since 2014 and for 2015 on behalf of European Organisation for Rare Diseases.

Hepburn was noted for her fashion choices and distinctive look, to the extent that journalist Mark Tungate has described her as a recognisable brand. When she first rose to stardom in "Roman Holiday" (1953), she was seen as an alternative feminine ideal that appealed more to women than to men, in comparison to the curvy and more sexual Grace Kelly and Elizabeth Taylor. With her short hair style, thick eyebrows, slim body and "gamine" looks, she presented a look which young women found easier to emulate than those of more sexual film stars. In 1954, fashion photographer Cecil Beaton declared Hepburn the "public embodiment of our new feminine ideal" in "Vogue", and wrote that "Nobody ever looked like her before World War II ... Yet we recognise the rightness of this appearance in relation to our historical needs. The proof is that thousands of imitations have appeared." The magazine and its British version frequently reported on her style throughout the following decade. Alongside model Twiggy, Hepburn has been cited as one of the key public figures who made being very slim fashionable.

Added to the International Best Dressed List in 1961, Hepburn was associated with a minimalistic style, usually wearing clothes with simple silhouettes which emphasised her slim body, monochromatic colours, and occasional statement accessories. In the late 1950s, Audrey Hepburn popularised plain black leggings. Academic Rachel Moseley describes the combination of "slim black trousers, flat ballet-style pumps and a fine black jersey" as one of her signature looks alongside little black dresses, noting that this style was new at the time when women still wore skirts and high heels more often than trousers and flat shoes.
Hepburn was in particular associated with French fashion designer Hubert de Givenchy, who was first hired to design her on-screen wardrobe for her second Hollywood film, "Sabrina" (1954), when she was still unknown as a film actor and he a young couturier just starting his fashion house. Although initially disappointed that "Miss Hepburn" was not Katharine Hepburn as he had mistakenly thought, Givenchy and Hepburn formed a lifelong friendship. She became his muse, and the two became so closely associated with each other that academic Jayne Sheridan has stated "we might ask 'Did Audrey Hepburn create Givenchy or was it the other way around?'".

In addition to "Sabrina", Givenchy designed her costumes for "Love in the Afternoon" (1957), "Breakfast at Tiffany's" (1961), "Funny Face" (1957), "Charade" (1963), "Paris When It Sizzles" (1964) and "How to Steal a Million" (1966), as well as clothed her off screen. According to Moseley, fashion plays an unusually central role in many of Hepburn's films, stating that "the costume is not tied to the character, functioning 'silently' in the mise-en-scène, but as 'fashion' becomes an attraction in the aesthetic in its own right". Hepburn herself stated that Givenchy "gave me a look, a kind, a silhouette. He has always been the best and he stayed the best. Because he kept the spare style that I love. What is more beautiful than a simple sheath made an extraordinary way in a special fabric, and just two earrings?" She also became the face of Givenchy's first perfume, L'Interdit, in 1957. In addition to her partnership with Givenchy, Hepburn was credited with boosting the sales of Burberry trench coats when she wore one in "Breakfast at Tiffany's", and was associated with Italian footwear brand Tod's.

In her private life, Hepburn preferred to wear casual and comfortable clothes, contrary to the "haute couture" she wore on screen and at public events. Despite being admired for her beauty, she never considered herself attractive, stating in a 1959 interview that "you can even say that I hated myself at certain periods. I was too fat, or maybe too tall, or maybe just plain too ugly... you can say my definiteness stems from underlying feelings of insecurity and inferiority. I couldn't conquer these feelings by acting indecisive. I found the only way to get the better of them was by adopting a forceful, concentrated drive." In 1989, she stated that "my look is attainable ... Women can look like Audrey Hepburn by flipping out their hair, buying the large glasses and the little sleeveless dresses."

Hepburn's influence as a style icon continues several decades after the height of her acting career in the 1950s and 1960s. Moseley notes that especially after her death in 1993, she became increasingly admired, with magazines frequently advising readers on how to get her look and fashion designers using her as inspiration. In 2004, Hepburn was named the "most beautiful woman of all time" and "most beautiful woman of the 20th century" in polls by Evian and QVC respectively, and in 2015, was voted "the most stylish Brit of all time" in a poll commissioned by Samsung. Her film costumes fetch large sums of money in auctions: one of the "little black dresses" designed by Givenchy for "Breakfast at Tiffany's" was sold by Christie's for a record sum of £467,200 in 2006.

On 19 April 2015 a robot called Sophia, modelled after Hepburn, was activated.





</doc>
<doc id="59216" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59216" title="Liza Minnelli">
Liza Minnelli

Liza May Minnelli (; born March 12, 1946) is an American actress and singer. Primarily known for her Academy Award-winning role as Sally Bowles in the 1972 musical film "Cabaret" directed by Bob Fosse, she is noted for her energetic stage presence and her powerful contralto singing voice.

Minnelli is the daughter of film actress and singer Judy Garland and film director Vincente Minnelli. Moving to New York City in 1961, she began her career as a musical theatre actress, nightclub performer and traditional pop recording artist, and gave her professional stage debut in the 1963 Off-Broadway revival of "Best Foot Forward". In 1965 she won the Tony Award for Best Actress in a Musical for "Flora the Red Menace", becoming the youngest ever recipient in this category. "Flora" marked the beginning of her lifelong collaboration with the show's composer John Kander and lyricist Fred Ebb, who would write, produce or direct many of Minnelli's stage acts and TV shows. Ebb helped create Minnelli′s stage persona of a stylized survivalist, including her career-defining performances of anthems of survival ("New York, New York", "Cabaret", "Maybe This Time").

Critically lauded for her non-musical dramatic performance in the film "The Sterile Cuckoo" (1969), she rose to international stardom with "Cabaret" and the Emmy Award-winning TV special "Liza with a Z" (1972). Most of her following film projects received mixed reviews and failed commercially, and she had no more major movie hits except the 1981 romantic comedy "Arthur". Her other films have included "Lucky Lady" (1975), "New York, New York" (1977), "Rent-a-Cop" (1988) and "Stepping Out" (1991). She additionally worked on television, starring several variety musical specials, non-musical films like "A Time to Live" (1985) and "Parallel Lives" (1994) and has been an acclaimed guest star in the sitcom "Arrested Development" between 2003 and 2013. Minnelli successfully returned to Broadway in Kander and Ebb′s "The Act" (1977) and "The Rink" (1984) as well as various concert shows including "Liza's at The Palace..." in 2008.

From the late 1970s onwards, Minnelli's work has predominantly focused on concert tours and nightclub performances. She gave highly regarded performances at Carnegie Hall in 1979 and 1987, and at Radio City Music Hall in 1991 and 1992. Between 1988 and 1990 she toured alongside Frank Sinatra and Sammy Davis Jr. in "Frank, Liza & Sammy: The Ultimate Event". Actually best known for her renditions of pop standards, Minnelli′s albums from 1968 to 1977 contained much of the contemporary singer-songwriter material, and in 1989 she released the electronic pop album "Results". In 2014, "Out" named Minnelli a gay icon in a list titled "The 12 Greatest Female Gay Icons of All Time".

Minnelli was born on March 12, 1946 in Hollywood, California, to Judy Garland and Vincente Minnelli. In 1961 she moved to New York City, attending High School of Performing Arts and Chadwick School. Her first performing experience on film was at age three where she appeared in the final scene of the musical "In the Good Old Summertime" (1949). The film stars Garland and Van Johnson.

Minnelli has a half-sister, Lorna, and half-brother, Joey, from Garland's marriage to Sid Luft. She also has another half-sister, Christiane Nina Minnelli (nicknamed Tina Nina), from her father's second marriage.
Minnelli's godparents were Kay Thompson and her husband William Spier. Her parents named her after Ira Gershwin's song "Liza (All the Clouds'll Roll Away)".

During 1961, Minnelli was an apprentice at the Cape Cod Melody Tent, Hyannis, Massachusetts. She appeared in the chorus of "Flower Drum Song" and played the part of Muriel in "Take Me Along". Minnelli began performing professionally at age 17, in 1963, in an Off-Broadway revival of the musical "Best Foot Forward", for which she received the Theatre World Award.

The next year, her mother invited Liza to perform with her in concert at the London Palladium. Both concerts were recorded and released as an album. She attended Scarsdale High School for one year, starring in a production of "The Diary of Anne Frank" which then went to Israel on tour. She turned to Broadway at 19, and won her first Tony Award as a leading actress for "Flora the Red Menace". It was the first time she worked with the musical duo John Kander and Fred Ebb.

Minnelli began as a nightclub singer as an adolescent, making her professional nightclub debut at the age of 19 at the Shoreham Hotel in Washington, D.C. That same year she began appearing in other clubs and on stage in Las Vegas, Los Angeles, Chicago, Miami, and New York City. Her success as a live performer led to her recording several albums for Capitol Records: "Liza! Liza!" (1964), "It Amazes Me" (1965), and "There Is a Time" (1966). In her early years, she recorded traditional pop standards as well as show tunes from various musicals in which she starred. Because of this fact, William Ruhlmann named her "Barbra Streisand's little sister". The Capitol albums "Liza! Liza!", "It Amazes Me", and "There Is A Time" were reissued on the two-CD compilation "The Capitol Years" in 2001, in their entirety.

From 1968 to the 1970s, she also recorded her albums "Liza Minnelli" (1968), "Come Saturday Morning" and "New Feelin'" (both 1970) for A&M Records. She released "The Singer" (1973) and "Tropical Nights" (1977) on Columbia Records.

In 1989 Minnelli collaborated with the Pet Shop Boys on "Results", an electronic dance-style album. The release hit the top 10 in the UK and also charted in the US, spawning four singles: "Losing My Mind"; "Don't Drop Bombs"; "So Sorry, I Said'"; and "Love Pains". Initially released on VHS titled "Visible Results", the clips were later issued on a bonus DVD included in the 2005 remastered and expanded edition of the album.

Later that year she performed "Losing My Mind" live at the Grammys ceremony before receiving a Grammy Legend Award (the first Grammy Legend Awards were issued in 1990 to Minnelli, Andrew Lloyd Webber, Smokey Robinson, and Willie Nelson). With this award, she became one of only 16 people – in a list that includes composer Richard Rodgers, Whoopi Goldberg, Barbra Streisand, and John Gielgud among others – to win an Emmy, Grammy, Tony Award, and Academy Award.

In April 1992, Minnelli appeared at the tribute concert to her late friend Freddie Mercury, performing "We Are the Champions" with the surviving members of the rock band Queen at Wembley Stadium, London.

In 1996, Minnelli released a new studio album titled "Gently". It was a recording of jazz standards and also included some contemporary songs such as the cover of "Does He Love You" which she performed as a duet with Donna Summer. This album brought her a Grammy nomination for Best Traditional Pop Vocal Performance. Minnelli was nominated in 2009 for Best Traditional Pop Vocal Album for her studio recording "Liza's at the Palace...!", based on her hit Broadway show.

In 2006, Minnelli appeared on My Chemical Romance's album "The Black Parade", providing backing vocals and singing a solo part with Gerard Way on the track "Mama."

In May 2010, Playbill.com reported Minnelli would be releasing an album on the Decca Records label entitled "Confessions", which was released on September 21, 2010.

Her first appearance on film is as the baby in the very last shot of her mother's film, "In the Good Old Summertime" (1949). Her first credited film role was as the love-interest in Albert Finney's only film as director and star, "Charlie Bubbles" (1967), although four years earlier, she did voice-over work for the animated film "Journey Back to Oz", a sequel to the 1939 MGM film "The Wizard of Oz". Minnelli was the voice of Dorothy (a character played in the earlier film by her mother Judy Garland) in what would have been her first credited film role had it been released in 1964 as planned—the Filmation production was delayed, eventually being released in the UK during 1972.

In 1969 she appeared in Alan J. Pakula's first feature film, "The Sterile Cuckoo" (1969), as Pookie Adams, a needy, eccentric teenager. Her performance won her her first Academy Award nomination. She played another eccentric character in "Tell Me That You Love Me, Junie Moon" (1970), directed by Otto Preminger.

Minnelli appeared in her best-known film role, Sally Bowles, in the 1972 film version of "Cabaret". She said that one of the things she did to prepare was to study photographs of classic actresses Louise Glaum and Louise Brooks and the dark-haired ladies of that time. Minnelli won the Academy Award for Best Actress in a Leading Role for her performance, along with a Golden Globe Award, a BAFTA Award, and also a Sant Jordi Award and a David di Donatello Award for Best Foreign Actress.

Following the success of "Cabaret", Bob Fosse and Minnelli teamed up for "Liza with a 'Z'. A Concert for Television", a made-for-television special. The program aired two times on TV and was not seen again until a DVD release in 2006.

Minnelli worked with her father in "A Matter of Time" (1976), co-starring Ingrid Bergman. Her appearance opposite Robert De Niro in the musical drama film, "New York, New York" (1977), however, gave Minnelli her best known signature song. She sometimes duetted live on stage with Frank Sinatra, who recorded a cover version (for his "" album).

After her performance in "Arthur" (1981), as Dudley Moore's love interest, Minnelli made fewer film appearances, although she returned to the big screen for "" (1988) and "Stepping Out" (1991), a musical comedy drama.

During the early days of television in the 1950s, Minnelli appeared as a child guest on Art Linkletter's show and sang and danced with Gene Kelly on his first television special in 1959. She was a guest star in one episode of the "Ben Casey" television series starring Vince Edwards and was a frequent guest on chat shows of the day including numerous appearances on shows hosted by Jack Paar, Merv Griffin, Mike Douglas, Joe Franklin, Dinah Shore and Johnny Carson. During the 1960s she made several guest appearances on "Rowan & Martin's Laugh-In" as well as other variety shows such as "The Ed Sullivan Show", "The Hollywood Palace", as well as "The Judy Garland Show". In 1964 she appeared as Minnie in her first television dramatic role in the episode "Nightingale for Sale" on Craig Stevens's short-lived CBS series, "Mr. Broadway".

Much later in her career, Minnelli has made guest appearances on such shows as "Arrested Development", "" and "Drop Dead Diva". In the UK she has appeared on the Ruby Wax, Graham Norton and Jonathan Ross shows and in October 2006 participated in a comedy skit on the Charlotte Church Show and was featured on the Michael Parkinson Show.

In November 2009, American Public Television aired "Liza's at the Palace", taped from September 30 – October 1, 2009 in Las Vegas at the MGM Grand's Hollywood Theatre. The executive producers of the taping, Craig Zadan and Neil Meron, previously were involved with the 2005 rerelease of 1972's Emmy Award- and Peabody Award-winning "Liza with a 'Z"'.

She returned to Broadway in 1997, taking over the title role in the musical "Victor/Victoria", replacing Julie Andrews. In his review, "New York Times" critic Ben Brantley commented, "her every stage appearance is perceived as a victory of show-business stamina over psychic frailty. She asks for love so nakedly and earnestly, it seems downright vicious not to respond."

In 1995 Minnelli and long time collaborator Billy Stritch recorded a number of American standards "unplugged", and were considered by many to be the Holy Grail of Minnelli's career, showing a sultrier and softer, more interpretive side to her artistry. The songs were later released in 2010, making the album "Confessions".

After a serious case of viral encephalitis in 2000, doctors predicted that she would spend the rest of her life in a wheelchair and would perhaps not even be able to speak again. However, taking vocal and dance lessons daily (especially with Sam Harris, Ron Lewis, and Angela Bacari), she managed to recover. She returned to the stage in 2001 when asked by long-time friend Michael Jackson to perform at Madison Square Garden in New York City where she sang "Never Never Land" and the televised "You Are Not Alone" at the concert produced by soon to be husband David Gest. Minnelli told reporters, "I am stable as a table."

Gest was so impressed with her stamina and ability to stun audiences that he produced her in "Liza's Back" in spring 2002 performing to rave reviews in London and New York City. (Most noted in that tour was a tribute to her mother. After years of declining fans' pleas for her to sing Garland's signature song, "Over The Rainbow", she concluded Act 1 with the final refrain of her mother's famous anthem, to an instant ovation.) Among performing her classic hits, other numbers unreleased in the album version included "I Believe You" by The Carpenters, a rap version of "Liza With A 'Z'", "Yes", and Mary J. Blige's "Family Affair", 2001.

VH1 signed on Minnelli and Gest in 2002 to appear in a reality show entitled "Liza & David". The pilot episode was filmed following the couple around as they prepared for a party at their home, with a guest list including Ray Charles, Luther Vandross, Isaac Mizrahi, Anastacia, among many others. The show was cancelled shortly after the pilot episode was filmed due to a dispute between Gest, Minnelli and VH1, and never aired. Recordings of the pilot episode still exist.
From 2003 through 2005, she appeared as a recurring character on the critically acclaimed, Emmy Award-winning TV sitcom "Arrested Development" as Lucille Austero (also known as "Lucille 2"), the lover of both the sexually and socially awkward Buster Bluth and Buster's brother Gob. Minnelli reprised the role for the show's fourth season in 2013.

In September 2006, she made a guest appearance on the long-running NBC drama "", in "Masquerade", a Halloween-themed episode, broadcast on October 31, 2006. She also completed guest vocals on My Chemical Romance's 2006 concept album "The Black Parade," portraying "Mother War," a dark conception of the main character's mother, in the song "Mama".
Minnelli returned to Broadway in a new solo concert at the Palace Theatre called "Liza's at The Palace...!" which ran from December 3, 2008, through January 4, 2009. In her second act she performed a series of numbers created by Kay Thompson. The reviews noted that while her voice was ragged at times, and her movements no longer elastic, the old magic was still very much present—from first to last, Minnelli had audiences cheering and applauding and begging for more. The show was subsequently staged at the MGM Grand in Las Vegas on September 30 and October 1, 2009, at which time it was filmed for broadcast on public television and a February 2010 DVD and Blu-ray release.

On January 10, 2009, Minnelli made a rare live TV appearance in a surprise cameo on NBC's "Saturday Night Live", playing the best friend of "Penelope" (Kristen Wiig). On January 26, 2009, she made an appearance on "The View", singing "I Would Never Leave You" (written by Johnny Rodgers, Billy Stritch, and Brian Lane Green) from her new CD "Liza's at The Palace...!". She was also interviewed by the cast of "The View".

She was a character in the Australian musical "The Boy from Oz" starring Hugh Jackman. In the show's Broadway production, she was portrayed by Stephanie J. Block. In October 2009, Minnelli toured Australia, and appeared on "Australian Idol" as a mentor and guest judge. In February 2010, Minnelli appeared in a Snickers commercial along with Aretha Franklin and Betty White. Minnelli made a cameo appearance in the May 2010 release of "Sex and the City 2", in which she covered Beyoncé's hit Single Ladies (Put a Ring on It) and Cole Porter's Ev'ry Time We Say Goodbye. She also made a starring appearance in December 2010 in NBC's "The Apprentice".

On June 14, 2012 Liza headlined at Hampton Court Palace Festival, an annual event which takes place at Hampton Court Palace in Surrey, England. On May 9, 2014, Minnelli had a guest appearance on Cher's Dressed to Kill Tour in Brooklyn, performing "Girls Just Want to Have Fun" alongside Cyndi Lauper and Rosie O'Donnell. On July 24, 2015, Minnelli performed at the IP Casino Resort & Spa, celebrating the 50th anniversary of the closing of "Flora the Red Menace".

Minnelli has long suffered from alcoholism, and has been addicted to prescription drugs, originating from a Valium prescription after her mother died. Minnelli left her 1984 musical "The Rink" to enter the Betty Ford Clinic. Her use of recreational drugs in the 1970s was noted by Andy Warhol, who in a 1978 diary entry recalled Minnelli arriving at Halston's house and imploring the host to "Give me every drug you've got." Along with Warhol and Bianca Jagger, Minnelli made frequent appearances at New York City nightclubs during the late 1970s.

Minnelli has stated that she is an Episcopalian.

She and her family moved her mother's remains from Ferncliff Cemetery to Hollywood Forever Cemetery in 2017. 

Minnelli has married and divorced four times. Her first marriage was to entertainer Peter Allen on March 3, 1967. Australian-born Allen was Judy Garland's protégé in the mid-1960s. They divorced on July 24, 1974. Minnelli told "The Advocate" editor-in-chief Judy Wieder in September 1996, "I married Peter and he didn't tell me he was gay. Everyone knew but me. And I found out ... well, let me put it this way: I'll never surprise anybody coming home as long as I live. I call first!"

Later that year, she married Jack Haley Jr., a producer and director, on September 15, 1974. His father, Jack Haley, was Garland's co-star in "The Wizard of Oz." They divorced in April 1979.

Minnelli was married to Mark Gero, a sculptor and stage manager, from December 4, 1979 until their divorce in January 1992.

She was married to David Gest, a concert promoter, from March 16, 2002, until their separation in July 2003, and their divorce in April 2007. In a 2003 lawsuit, Gest alleged that Minnelli beat him in alcohol-induced rages during their marriage.

Minnelli also had relationships with Rock Brynner (son of Yul Brynner), Desi Arnaz, Jr., Peter Sellers, and Martin Scorsese.

Minnelli has no children; one pregnancy left her with a hiatal hernia as a result of the medical steps taken to try to save the baby.

Minnelli has, throughout her lifetime, served various charities and causes which she considers important. She served on the board of directors of The Institutes for The Achievement of Human Potential (IAHP) for 20 years, a nonprofit educational organization that introduces parents to the field of child brain development. In a 2006 interview with Randy Rice at Broadwayworld.com Minnelli said that she was the person who told Elizabeth Taylor about HIV/AIDS while talking about their mutual friend, Rock Hudson. She has also dedicated much time to amfAR, The Foundation for AIDS Research, which was co-founded by Taylor.

In 2007, she stated in an interview with "Palm Springs Life" magazine, "AmfAR is important to me because I've lost so many friends that I knew [to AIDS]". In 1994, she recorded the Kander & Ebb tune "The Day After That" and donated the proceeds to AIDS research. That same year she performed the song in front of thousands in Central Park at the 25th anniversary of the Stonewall riots.





</doc>
<doc id="29455" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29455" title="Sandra Bullock">
Sandra Bullock

Sandra Annette Bullock (; born July 26, 1964) is an American actress, producer, and philanthropist. She made her acting debut with a minor role in the 1987 thriller "Hangmen", and made her television debut in the film "Bionic Showdown: The Six Million Dollar Man and the Bionic Woman" (1989), and played the lead role in the short-lived NBC sitcom "Working Girl." Her breakthrough role was in the film "Demolition Man" (1993). She subsequently starred in several successful films including "Speed" (1994), "While You Were Sleeping" (1995), "The Net" (1995), "A Time to Kill" (1996), "Hope Floats" (1998), and "Practical Magic" (1998).

Bullock achieved further success in the following decades in "Miss Congeniality" (2000), "Two Weeks Notice" (2002), "Crash" (2004), "The Proposal" (2009), and "The Heat" (2013). She was awarded the Academy Award for Best Actress and the Golden Globe Award for Best Actress in a Drama for playing Leigh Anne Tuohy in "The Blind Side" (2009), and was nominated in the same categories for her performance in "Gravity" (2013). Bullock's greatest commercial success is the animated comedy film "Minions" (2015), which grossed over US$1 billion at the box office. In 2007, she was one of Hollywood's highest-paid actresses. She was also named "Most Beautiful Woman" by "People" magazine in 2015.

In addition to her acting career, Bullock is the founder of the production company Fortis Films. She has produced some of the films in which she starred, including "Two Weeks Notice", "", and "All About Steve". She was an executive producer of the ABC sitcom "George Lopez", and made several appearances during its run.

Bullock was born in Arlington, Virginia. Her father, John W. Bullock (born 1925), was a United States Army employee and part-time voice coach; her mother, Helga Mathilde Meyer (1942–2000), was an opera singer and voice teacher. Helga was German, while John is from Birmingham, Alabama and has English, French, German, and Irish ancestry. Bullock's maternal grandfather was a German rocket scientist from Nuremberg. John, who was in charge of the U.S. Army's Military Postal Service in Europe, was stationed in Nuremberg when he met Helga. They married in Germany and moved to Arlington, where John worked with the Army Materiel Command before becoming a contractor for The Pentagon. Bullock has a younger sister, Gesine Bullock-Prado, who went on to serve as vice president of Bullock's production company Fortis Films. Until the age of 18, Bullock held American-German dual citizenship. She then held only American citizenship until 2009, when she reapplied for German citizenship.

Bullock was raised in Germany (Nuremberg) and Austria (Vienna and Salzburg) for 12 years, and grew up speaking German. She attended the humanistic Waldorf School in Nuremberg. As a child, while her mother went on European opera tours, Bullock usually stayed with her aunt Christl and cousin Susanne, the latter of whom would later marry German politician Peter Ramsauer. Bullock studied ballet and vocal arts as a child and frequently accompanied her mother, taking small parts in her opera productions. She sang in the opera's children's choir at the Staatstheater Nürnberg. Bullock has a scar above her left eye, caused by falling into a creek when she was a child. She attended Washington-Lee High School, where she was a cheerleader and performed in high school theater productions. After graduating in 1982, she attended East Carolina University in Greenville, North Carolina, where she received a BFA in Drama in 1987. While at ECU, she performed in multiple theater productions, including "Peter Pan" and "Three Sisters". She then moved to Manhattan, New York, where she supported herself as a bartender, cocktail waitress, and coat checker while auditioning for roles.

While in New York, Bullock took acting classes with Sanford Meisner. She appeared in several student films, and later landed a role in an Off-Broadway play "No Time Flat". Director Alan J. Levi was impressed by Bullock's performance and offered her a part in the TV movie "Bionic Showdown: The Six Million Dollar Man and the Bionic Woman" (1989). This led to her being cast in a series of small roles in several independent films as well as in the lead role of the short-lived NBC television version of the film "Working Girl" (1990). She went on to appear in several films, such as "Love Potion No. 9" (1992), "The Thing Called Love" (1993) and "Fire on the Amazon" (1993).

Bullock had a prominent supporting role in the science-fiction/action film "Demolition Man" (1993), followed by a leading role in "Speed" the following year. "Speed" took in $350 million at the box office worldwide.

A string of successes during the mid-1990s included "While You Were Sleeping" (1995), for which she received her first Golden Globe Award nomination for Best Actress – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy, "The Net" (1995) and "A Time to Kill" (1996). Bullock received $11 million for "" (1997), which she agreed to star in for financial backing for her own project, "Hope Floats" (1998). She has stated that she regrets making the sequel.

She was selected as one of "People" magazine's 50 Most Beautiful People in the World in 1996 and 1999, and was also ranked No. 58 in "Empire" magazine's Top 100 Movie Stars of All Time list.

In 2000, Bullock starred in "Miss Congeniality", a financial success that took in $212 million at the box office worldwide, and received another Golden Globe Award nomination for Best Actress – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy. She was presented with the 2002 Raúl Juliá Award for Excellence for her efforts, as the executive producer of the sitcom "George Lopez," in helping expand career openings for Hispanic talent in the media and entertainment industry. She also made several appearances on the show as Accident Amy, an accident-prone employee at the factory Lopez's character manages. The same year, she starred opposite Hugh Grant in "Two Weeks Notice" (2002).

In 2004, Bullock had a supporting role in the film "Crash", which won the Academy Award for Best Picture. She received positive reviews for her performance, with some critics suggesting that it was the best performance of her career. She later received a $17.5 million salary for "" (2005). The same year, she was a co-recipient of the Women in Film Crystal Award.

Although Bullock was reunited with her "Speed" co-star Keanu Reeves in the romantic drama "The Lake House", their film characters are separated throughout the film, so Bullock and Reeves were only on set together for two weeks during filming. The same year, Bullock appeared in "Infamous", playing author Harper Lee. Bullock also starred in "Premonition" with Julian McMahon, which was released in March 2007. In 2008, Bullock was announced as "the face" of the cosmetic brand Artistry.

The year 2009 proved to be especially good for Bullock, giving the actress two record highs in her career, as earlier in the year she released "The Proposal", with co-star Ryan Reynolds, grossed $317 million at the box office worldwide, making it her fourth-most successful picture to date. She received her third Golden Globe Award nomination for Best Actress role for Motion Picture Musical or Comedy.

In November 2009, Bullock starred in "The Blind Side", which opened at No. 2 behind "" with $34.2 million, making it her second-highest opening weekend ever. "The Blind Side" was unusual in that it had a 17.6% increase at the box office its second weekend, and it took the top spot of the box office in its third weekend. The film cost $29 million to make according to the Box Office Mojo. It grossed over $309 million, making it her highest-grossing domestic film, her fourth-highest-grossing film worldwide, and the first one in history to pass the $200 million mark with only one top-billed female star.
Bullock had initially turned down the role of Leigh Anne Tuohy three times due to a discomfort with portraying a devout Christian. She was awarded the Academy Award for Best Actress, Golden Globe Award for Best Actress in a Motion Picture – Drama, Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Leading Role and Critics' Choice Movie Award for Best Actress. "The Blind Side" also received an Academy Award for Best Picture nomination.

Winning the Oscar also gave Bullock another unique distinction—since she won two "Razzies" the day before, for her performance in "All About Steve" (2009), she is the only performer ever to have been named both "Best" and "Worst" for the same year.

In 2011, Bullock starred in the drama "Extremely Loud & Incredibly Close" alongside Tom Hanks, a film adaptation based on the novel of the same name. Despite mixed reviews, the film was nominated for numerous awards, including an Academy Award for Best Picture nomination. Bullock was nominated for Best Actress Drama by Teen Choice Awards.

In 2013, Bullock starred in the comedy film "The Heat", alongside Melissa McCarthy. It received positive reviews from critics, and took in $230 million at the box office worldwide. Bullock also starred in the space thriller film "Gravity", opposite George Clooney. The film premiered at the 70th Venice Film Festival, and was released on October 4, 2013 to coincide with the beginning of World Space Week. "Gravity" received universal acclaim among critics and a standing ovation in Venice. The film was called "the most realistic and beautifully choreographed film ever set in space". Bullock's performance was praised, with some critics calling "Gravity" the best work of her career. "Variety" wrote, "Gravity" took in $716 million at the box office worldwide, making it Bullock's second-most successful picture. For her role as Dr. Ryan Stone, Bullock was nominated for the Academy Award, Golden Globe Award, BAFTA Award, Screen Actors Guild Award, and Critics' Choice Movie Award for Best Actress. By August 2014, Bullock was the highest-earning actress in Hollywood. In 2015, she voiced the character of Scarlet Overkill in the animated film "Minions", which became her highest-grossing film to date, with over $1.1 billion worldwide. That same year, Bullock also starred in and co-executive produced the comedy-drama film "Our Brand Is Crisis".

, Bullock's films have grossed over $5.1 billion worldwide, which makes her the 29th-most profitable movie star according to "The Numbers"; her total domestic gross stands at roughly $2.5 billion, placing her as the 21st-top U.S. star at the box office.

Bullock is set to star in an all-female spin-off of the "Ocean's Eleven" franchise, titled "Ocean's 8", which will be directed by Gary Ross.

Since her acting debut, Bullock has been dubbed "America’s sweetheart" in the media due to her "friendly and direct and so unpretentious" nature.

On March 24, 2005, Bullock received a motion pictures star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame at 6801 Hollywood Boulevard in Hollywood.

While critics have praised her screen persona, some have been less receptive towards her films. At the 2009 release of "The Proposal", Mark Kermode said Bullock had made only three good films: "Speed", "While You Were Sleeping", and "Crash", and added that "she's funny, she's gorgeous, it's impossible not to love her, and yet she makes rotten film after rotten film".

Bullock was selected by "People" magazine as its 2010 Woman of the Year and ranked No. 12 on "People"s Most Beautiful 2011 list.
In 2010, "Time" magazine included Bullock in its annual "TIME" 100 as one of the "Most Influential People in the World."

In 2013, "The Hollywood Reporter" named Bullock among the most powerful women in entertainment. In September 2013, Bullock joined other Hollywood legends at the TCL Chinese Theatre on Hollywood Boulevard by making imprints of her hand- and footprints in cement in the theater's forecourt.

In November 2013 it was announced that Bullock was named "Entertainment Weekly"s Entertainer of the Year due to her success with "The Heat" and "Gravity", which "Entertainment Weekly" believed would earn her an Oscar nomination. Bullock shared the title with other distinguished people in the industry such as the creators of the television show "Breaking Bad", Matthew McConaughey, Jennifer Lawrence, "Grumpy Cat" and others.

In 2014, Bullock ranked No. 2 on "Forbes" list of most powerful actresses and was honored with the Decade of Hotness Award by Spike Guys' Choice Awards.
In 2015, she was named "The Most Beautiful Woman" by "People."

Bullock runs her own production company, Fortis Films. She was an executive producer of the "George Lopez" sitcom (co-produced with Robert Borden), which garnered a syndication deal that banked her some $10 million. Bullock tried to produce a film based on F.X. Toole's short story "Million-Dollar Baby", but could not interest the studios in a female boxing drama. The story was eventually adapted and directed by Clint Eastwood as the Oscar-winning film, "Million Dollar Baby" (2004). Fortis Films also produced "All About Steve" which was released in September 2009. Her father, John Bullock, is the company's CEO, and her sister, Gesine Bullock-Prado, is the former president.

In November 2006, Bullock founded an Austin, Texas restaurant, Bess Bistro, located on West 6th Street. She later opened another business, Walton's Fancy and Staple, across the street in a building she extensively renovated. Walton's is a bakery, upscale restaurant and floral shop that also offers services including event planning. After almost nine years in business, Bess Bistro closed on September 20, 2015.

Bullock has been a public supporter of the American Red Cross, having donated $1 million to the organization at least five times. Her first public donation of that amount was to the Red Cross's Liberty Disaster Relief Fund. Three years later, she sent money in response to the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunamis. In 2010, she donated $1 million to relief efforts in Haiti following the Haiti earthquake, and again donated the same amount following the 2011 Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami. In 2017, she donated $1 million to support Red Cross relief efforts for Hurricane Harvey in Texas.

Along with other stars, Bullock did a public service announcement urging people to sign a petition for clean-up efforts of the oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico. Bullock backs the Texas non-profit organization The Kindred Life Foundation, Inc., and in late 2008 joined other top celebrities in supporting the work of KLF's founder and CEO Amos Ramirez. At a fundraising gala for the organization, Bullock said, "Amos has led many efforts across our nation that have helped families that are in need. Our country needs more organizations that are committed to the service that Kindred Life is."

In 2012, Bullock was inducted into the Warren Easton Hall of Fame for her donations to charities, and in 2013 was honored with the Favorite Humanitarian Award at the 39th People's Choice Awards in 2013 for her contributions to New Orleans' Warren Easton High School, which was severely damaged by 2005's Hurricane Katrina.

Bullock was once engaged to actor Tate Donovan, whom she met while filming "Love Potion No. 9". Their relationship lasted three years. She previously dated football player Troy Aikman, and actors Matthew McConaughey and Ryan Gosling.

Bullock married motorcycle builder and "Monster Garage" host Jesse James on July 16, 2005. They first met when Bullock arranged for her ten-year-old godson to meet James as a Christmas present. In November 2009, Bullock and James entered into a custody battle with James' second ex-wife, former adult film actress Janine Lindemulder, with whom James had a child. Bullock and James subsequently won full legal custody of James' five-year-old daughter.

In March 2010, a scandal arose when several women claimed to have had affairs with James during his marriage to Bullock. Bullock canceled European promotional appearances for "The Blind Side" citing "unforeseen personal reasons." On March 18, 2010, James responded to the rumors of infidelity by issuing a public apology to Bullock. He stated, "The vast majority of the allegations reported are untrue and unfounded … beyond that, I will not dignify these private matters with any further public comment." James declared, "There is only one person to blame for this whole situation, and that is me." He asked that Bullock and their children one day "find it in their hearts to forgive me" for their "pain and embarrassment." James' publicist subsequently announced on March 30, 2010 that James had checked into a rehabilitation facility to "deal with personal issues" and save his marriage to Bullock. However, on April 28, 2010, it was reported that Bullock had filed for divorce on April 23 in Austin, Texas. Their divorce was finalized on June 28, 2010, with "conflict of personalities" cited as the reason.

Bullock announced on April 28, 2010 that she had proceeded with plans to adopt a son born in January 2010 in New Orleans, Louisiana. Bullock and James had begun an initial adoption process four months earlier. Bullock's son began living with them in January 2010, but they chose to keep the news private until after the Oscars in March 2010. However, given the couple's separation and then divorce, Bullock continued the adoption of her son as a single parent.

In December 2015, Bullock announced that she had adopted a second child, and appeared on the cover of "People" magazine with her then -year-old new daughter.

On December 20, 2000, Bullock, who was the only passenger, and the two crew all escaped uninjured in the crash of a chartered business jet. The pilots were unable to activate the runway lights during a night landing at Jackson Hole Airport due to not using up-to-date approach plates, but continued the landing anyway. The aircraft landed in the airport's graded safety area between the runway and parallel taxiway and hit a snowbank. The accident caused a separation of the nose cone and landing gear, partial separation of the right wing, and a bend in the left wing.

On April 18, 2008, while Bullock was in Massachusetts shooting the film "The Proposal", she and her then-husband Jesse James were in an SUV that was hit head-on (driver's side offset) at moderate speed by a drunken driver. Vehicle damage was minor and there were no injuries.

In October 2004, Bullock won a multimillion-dollar judgment against Benny Daneshjou, the builder of her Lake Austin, Texas home; the jury ruled that the house was uninhabitable. It has since been torn down and rebuilt. Daneshjou and his insurer later settled with Bullock for roughly half the awarded verdict.

On April 22, 2007, a woman named Marcia Diana Valentine was found lying outside James and Bullock's home in Orange County, California. When James confronted the woman, she ran to her car, got behind the wheel, and tried to run over him. She was said to be an obsessed fan of Bullock. Valentine was charged with one felony count each of aggravated assault and stalking. Bullock obtained a restraining order to bar Valentine from "contacting or coming near her home, family or work for three years". Valentine pleaded not guilty to charges of aggravated assault and stalking. She was subsequently convicted of stalking and sentenced to three years' probation.

Beginning in 2002, Bullock was also stalked across several states by a man named Thomas James Weldon. In 2003, Bullock obtained a restraining order against him, which was renewed in 2006. After the restraining order expired and Weldon was released from a mental institution, he again traveled across several states to find Bullock; she then obtained another restraining order.




</doc>
<doc id="64612" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=64612" title="Ginger Rogers">
Ginger Rogers

Ginger Rogers (born Virginia Katherine McMath; July 16, 1911 – April 25, 1995) was an American actress, dancer, and singer, widely known for performing in films and RKO's musical films, partnered with Fred Astaire. She appeared on stage, as well as on radio and television, throughout much of the 20th century.

Born in Independence, Missouri, at 100 West Moore Street, and raised in Kansas City, Rogers and her family moved to Fort Worth, Texas, when she was nine years old. After winning a 1925 Charleston dance contest that launched a successful vaudeville career, she gained recognition as a Broadway actress for her debut stage role in "Girl Crazy". This success led to a contract with Paramount Pictures, which ended after five films. Rogers had her first successful film role as a supporting actress in "42nd Street" (1933). Throughout the 1930s, Rogers made 10 films with Astaire, among which were some of her biggest successes, such as "Swing Time" (1936) and "Top Hat" (1935). After two commercial failures with Astaire, Rogers began to branch out into dramatic films and comedies. Her acting was well received by critics and audiences, and she became one of the biggest box-office draws of the 1940s. Her performance in "Kitty Foyle" (1940) won her the Academy Award for Best Actress.

Rogers remained successful throughout the 1940s and at one point was Hollywood's highest-paid actress, but her popularity had peaked by the end of the decade. She reunited with Astaire in 1949 in the commercially successful "The Barkleys of Broadway". After an unsuccessful period through the 1950s, Rogers made a successful return to Broadway in 1965, playing the lead role in "Hello, Dolly!". More lead roles on Broadway followed, along with her stage directorial debut in 1985 on an off-Broadway production of "Babes in Arms". Rogers also made television acting appearances until 1987. In 1992, Rogers was recognized at the Kennedy Center Honors. She died of a heart attack in 1995, at the age of 83.

Rogers is associated with the phrase "backwards and in high heels", the title of her memoir, attributed to Bob Thaves' "Frank and Ernest" cartoon with the caption "Sure he [Astaire] was great, but don't forget that Ginger Rogers did everything he did... backwards and in high heels". A Republican and a devout Christian Scientist, Rogers was married five times, with all of her marriages ending in divorce; she had no children. During her long career, Rogers made 73 films, and her musical films with Fred Astaire are credited with revolutionizing the genre. Rogers was a major movie star during the Golden Age of Hollywood, and is often considered an American icon. She ranks number 14 on the AFI's 100 Years...100 Stars list of female stars of classic American cinema.

Rogers was born Virginia Katherine McMath on July 16, 1911, in her mother's rented home at 100 Moore Street, Independence, Missouri. She was the only living child of Lela Emogene (née Owens; 1891 – 1977) and William Eddins McMath (1880 – 1925), an electrical engineer. She was of Scottish, Welsh, and English ancestry. Her mother did not want her born in a hospital, having lost a previous child there. Her parents separated shortly after she was born, but her grandparents, Wilma Saphrona (née Ball) and Walter Winfield Owens, lived nearby in Kansas City. After unsuccessfully trying to become a family again, McMath kidnapped his daughter twice. Rogers said that she never saw her natural father again. Her mother divorced her father soon thereafter.

In 1915, Rogers moved in with her grandparents while her mother made a trip to Hollywood in an effort to get an essay she had written made into a film. Lela succeeded and continued to write scripts for Fox Studios. Rogers was to remain close to her grandfather (much later, when she was a star in 1939, she bought him a home at 5115 Greenbush Avenue in Sherman Oaks, California, so he could be close to her while she was filming at the studios). 

One of Rogers' young cousins, Helen, had a hard time pronouncing "Virginia", shortening it to "Badinda"; the nickname soon became "Ginga".

When "Ginga" was nine years old, her mother remarried, to John Logan Rogers. Ginger took the surname Rogers, although she was never legally adopted. They lived in Fort Worth. Her mother became a theater critic for a local newspaper, the "Fort Worth Record". She attended, but did not graduate from, Fort Worth's Central High School (later renamed R.L. Paschal High School).

As a teenager, Rogers thought of becoming a school teacher, but with her mother's interest in Hollywood and the theater, her early exposure to the theater increased. Waiting for her mother in the wings of the Majestic Theatre, she began to sing and dance along with the performers on stage.

Rogers' entertainment career was born one night when the traveling vaudeville act of Eddie Foy came to Fort Worth and needed a quick stand-in. She then entered and won a Charleston dance contest which allowed her to tour for six months, at one point in 1926 performing at an 18-month-old theater called The Craterian in Medford, Oregon. This theater honored her many years later by changing its name to the Craterian Ginger Rogers Theater.

At 17, Rogers married Jack Culpepper, a singer/dancer/comedian/recording artist of the day who worked under the name Jack Pepper (according to Ginger's autobiography, she knew Culpepper when she was a child, as her cousin's boyfriend). They formed a short-lived vaudeville double act known as "Ginger and Pepper". The marriage was over within months, and she went back to touring with her mother. When the tour got to New York City, she stayed, getting radio singing jobs and then her Broadway debut in the musical "Top Speed", which opened on Christmas Day, 1929.

Within two weeks of opening in "Top Speed", Rogers was chosen to star on Broadway in "Girl Crazy" by George Gershwin and Ira Gershwin. Fred Astaire was hired to help the dancers with their choreography. Her appearance in "Girl Crazy" made her an overnight star at the age of 19.

Rogers' first movie roles were in a trio of short films made in 1929—"Night in the Dormitory", "A Day of a Man of Affairs", and "Campus Sweethearts". In 1930, she was signed by Paramount Pictures to a seven-year contract.

Rogers soon got herself out of the Paramount contract—under which she had made five feature films at Astoria Studios in Astoria, Queens—and moved with her mother to Hollywood. When she got to California, she signed a three-picture deal with Pathé Exchange. Two of her pictures at Pathé were "Suicide Fleet" (1931) and "Carnival Boat" (1932) in which she played opposite future Hopalong Cassidy star, William Boyd. Rogers also made feature films for Warner Bros., Monogram, and Fox in 1932, and was named one of 15 WAMPAS Baby Stars. She then made a significant breakthrough as Anytime Annie in the Warner Bros. film "42nd Street" (1933). She went on to make a series of films with Fox, Warner Bros. ("Gold Diggers of 1933"), Universal, Paramount, and RKO Radio Pictures. Her solo in "We're In The Money" from "Gold Diggers" included a verse in Pig Latin. 

Rogers was known for her partnership with Fred Astaire. Together, from 1933 to 1939, they made nine musical films at RKO: "Flying Down to Rio" (1933), "The Gay Divorcee" (1934), "Roberta" (1935), "Top Hat" (1935), "Follow the Fleet" (1936), "Swing Time" (1936), "Shall We Dance" (1937), "Carefree" (1938), and "The Story of Vernon and Irene Castle" (1939). "The Barkleys of Broadway" (1949) was produced later at MGM. They revolutionized the Hollywood musical, introducing dance routines of unprecedented elegance and virtuosity, set to songs specially composed for them by the greatest popular song composers of the day.

Arlene Croce, Hermes Pan, Hannah Hyam, and John Mueller all consider Rogers to have been Astaire's finest dance partner, principally because of her ability to combine dancing skills, natural beauty, and exceptional abilities as a dramatic actress and comedian, thus truly complementing Astaire, a peerless dancer who sometimes struggled as an actor and was not considered classically handsome. The resulting song and dance partnership enjoyed a unique credibility in the eyes of audiences.

Of the 33 partnered dances Rogers performed with Astaire, Croce and Mueller have highlighted the infectious spontaneity of her performances in the comic numbers "I'll Be Hard to Handle" from "Roberta", "I'm Putting All My Eggs in One Basket" from "Follow the Fleet", and "Pick Yourself Up" from "Swing Time". They also point to the use Astaire made of her remarkably flexible back in classic romantic dances such as "Smoke Gets in Your Eyes" from "Roberta", "Cheek to Cheek" from "Top Hat", and "Let's Face the Music and Dance" from "Follow the Fleet".

Although the dance routines were choreographed by Astaire and his collaborator Hermes Pan, both have acknowledged Rogers' input and have also testified to her consummate professionalism, even during periods of intense strain, as she tried to juggle her many other contractual film commitments with the punishing rehearsal schedules of Astaire, who made at most two films in any one year. In 1986, shortly before his death, Astaire remarked, "All the girls I ever danced with thought they couldn't do it, but of course they could. So they always cried. All except Ginger. No no, Ginger never cried".

John Mueller summed up Rogers' abilities as: "Rogers was outstanding among Astaire's partners, not because she was superior to others as a dancer, but, because, as a skilled, intuitive actress, she was cagey enough to realize that acting did not stop when dancing began ... the reason so many women have fantasized about dancing with Fred Astaire is that Ginger Rogers conveyed the impression that dancing with him is the most thrilling experience imaginable".

According to Astaire, when they were first teamed together in "Flying Down to Rio", "Ginger had never danced with a partner before. She faked it an awful lot. She couldn't tap and she couldn't do this and that ... but Ginger had style and talent and improved as she went along. She got so that after a while everyone else who danced with me looked wrong." Author Dick Richards, in his book "Ginger: Salute to a Star", quoted Astaire saying to Raymond Rohauer, curator at the New York Gallery of Modern Art, "Ginger was brilliantly effective. She made everything work for her. Actually she made things very fine for both of us and she deserves most of the credit for our success." When asked who his favorite dancing partner was by British TV interviewer Michael Parkinson on "Parkinson" in 1976, Astaire said "Excuse me, I must say Ginger was certainly the one. You know, the most effective partner I had. Everyone knows. That was a whole other thing what we did...I just want to pay a tribute to Ginger because we did so many pictures together and believe me it was a value to have that girl...she had it! She was just great!"

In her classic 1930s musicals with Astaire, Ginger Rogers, co-billed with him, was paid less than Fred, the creative force behind the dances, who also received 10% of the profits. She was also paid less than many of the supporting "farceurs" billed beneath her, in spite of her much more central role in the films' great financial successes. This was personally grating to her and had effects upon her relationships at RKO, especially with director Mark Sandrich, whose purported disrespect of Rogers prompted a sharp letter of reprimand from producer Pandro Berman, which she deemed important enough to publish in her autobiography. Rogers fought hard for her contract and salary rights and for better films and scripts.

After 15 months apart and with RKO facing bankruptcy, the studio paired Fred and Ginger for another movie titled "Carefree", but it lost money. Next came "The Story of Vernon and Irene Castle", but the serious plot and tragic ending resulted in the worst box-office receipts of any of their films. This was driven not by diminished popularity, but by the hard 1930s economic reality. The production costs of musicals, always significantly more costly than regular features, continued to increase at a much faster rate than admissions.

Both before and immediately after her dancing and acting partnership with Fred Astaire ended, Rogers starred in a number of successful nonmusical films. "Stage Door" (1937) demonstrated her dramatic capacity, as the loquacious yet vulnerable girl next door, a tough-minded, theatrical hopeful, opposite Katharine Hepburn. Successful comedies included "Vivacious Lady" (1938) with James Stewart, "Fifth Avenue Girl" (1939), where she played an out-of-work girl sucked into the lives of a wealthy family, and "Bachelor Mother" (1939), with David Niven, in which she played a shop girl who is falsely thought to have abandoned her baby.

In 1934, Rogers sued Sylvia of Hollywood for $100K for defamation. Sylvia, Hollywood's fitness guru and radio personality, had claimed that Rogers was on Sylvia's radio show when, in fact, she was not.

On March 5, 1939, Rogers starred in "Single Party Going East", an episode of "Silver Theater" on CBS radio.

In 1941, Rogers won the Academy Award for Best Actress for her role in 1940's "Kitty Foyle". She enjoyed considerable success during the early 1940s, and was RKO's hottest property during this period. In "Roxie Hart" (1942), based on the same play which served as the template for the later musical "Chicago", Rogers played a wisecracking wife on trial for a murder her husband committed.

In the neorealist "Primrose Path" (1940), directed by Gregory La Cava, she played a prostitute's daughter trying to avoid the fate of her mother. Further highlights of this period included "Tom, Dick, and Harry", a 1941 comedy in which she dreams of marrying three different men; "I'll Be Seeing You" (1944), with Joseph Cotten; and Billy Wilder's first Hollywood feature film: "The Major and the Minor" (1942), in which she played a woman who masquerades as a 12-year-old to get a cheap train ticket and finds herself obliged to continue the ruse for an extended period. This film featured a performance by Rogers' own real mother, Lela, playing her film mother.

After becoming a free agent, Rogers made hugely successful films with other studios in the mid-'40s, including "Tender Comrade" (1943), "Lady in the Dark" (1944), and "Week-End at the Waldorf" (1945), and became the highest-paid performer in Hollywood. However, by the end of the decade, her film career had peaked. Arthur Freed reunited her with Fred Astaire in "The Barkleys of Broadway" in 1949, when Judy Garland was unable to appear in the role that was to have reunited her with her "Easter Parade" co-star.

Rogers' film career entered a period of gradual decline in the 1950s, as parts for older actresses became more difficult to obtain, but she still scored with some solid movies. She starred in "Storm Warning" (1950) with Ronald Reagan and Doris Day, the noir, anti-Ku Klux Klan film by Warner Bros., and in "Monkey Business" (1952) with Cary Grant and Marilyn Monroe, directed by Howard Hawks. In the same year, she also starred in "We're Not Married!", also featuring Marilyn Monroe, and in "Dreamboat". She played the female lead in "Tight Spot" (1955), a mystery thriller, with Edward G. Robinson. After a series of unremarkable films, she scored a great popular success on Broadway in 1965, playing Dolly Levi in the long-running "Hello, Dolly!".
In later life, Rogers remained on good terms with Astaire; she presented him with a special Academy Award in 1950, and they were copresenters of individual Academy Awards in 1967, during which they elicited a standing ovation when they came on stage in an impromptu dance. In 1969, she had the lead role in another long-running popular production, "Mame", from the book by Jerome Lawrence and Robert Edwin Lee, with music and lyrics by Jerry Herman, at the Theatre Royal Drury Lane in the West End of London, arriving for the role on the liner "Queen Elizabeth 2" from New York City. Her docking there occasioned the maximum of pomp and ceremony at Southampton. She became the highest-paid performer in the history of the West End up to that time. The production ran for 14 months and featured a royal command performance for Queen Elizabeth II.

From the 1950s onwards, Rogers made occasional appearances on television, even substituting for a vacationing Hal March on "The $64,000 Question". In the later years of her career, she made guest appearances in three different series by Aaron Spelling: "The Love Boat" (1979), "Glitter" (1984), and "Hotel" (1987), which was her final screen appearance as an actress. In 1985, Rogers fulfilled a long-standing wish to direct when she directed the musical "Babes in Arms" off-Broadway in Tarrytown, New York, at 74 years old. Interviews can be found in the" New York Times" under "Ginger Rogers directs". It was produced by Michael Lipton and Robert Kennedy of Kennedy Lipton Productions. The production starred Broadway talents Donna Theodore, Carleton Carpenter, James Brennan, Randy Skinner, Karen Ziemba, Dwight Edwards, and Kim Morgan. It is also noted in her autobiography "Ginger, My Story".

The Kennedy Center honored Ginger Rogers in December 1992. This event, which was shown on television, was somewhat marred when Astaire's widow, Robyn Smith, who permitted clips of Astaire dancing with Rogers to be shown for free at the function itself, was unable to come to terms with CBS Television for broadcast rights to the clips (all previous rights-holders having donated broadcast rights" gratis").

For her contributions to the motion picture industry, Rogers has a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame at 6772 Hollywood Boulevard.

Rogers, an only child, maintained a close relationship with her mother, Lela Rogers, throughout her life. Lela, a newspaper reporter, scriptwriter, and movie producer, was also one of the first women to enlist in the Marine Corps, was a founder of the successful "Hollywood Playhouse" for aspiring actors and actresses on the RKO set, and a founder of the Motion Picture Alliance for the Preservation of American Ideals.

Rogers and her mother also had an extremely close professional relationship. Lela Rogers was credited with many pivotal contributions to her daughter's early successes in New York and in Hollywood, and gave her much assistance in contract negotiations with RKO.

On March 29, 1929, Rogers married for the first time at age 17 to her dancing partner Jack Pepper (real name Edward Jackson Culpepper). They divorced in 1931, having separated soon after the wedding. Ginger dated Mervyn LeRoy in 1932, but they ended the relationship and remained friends until his death in 1986. In 1934, she married actor Lew Ayres (1908–96). They divorced seven years later.

In 1943, Rogers married her third husband, Jack Briggs, who was a U.S. Marine. Upon his return from World War II, Briggs showed no interest in continuing his incipient Hollywood career. They divorced in 1949. In 1953, she married Jacques Bergerac, a French actor 16 years her junior, whom she met on a trip to Paris. A lawyer in France, he came to Hollywood with her and became an actor. They divorced in 1957. Her fifth and final husband was director and producer William Marshall. They married in 1961 and divorced in 1971, after his bouts with alcohol and the financial collapse of their joint film production company in Jamaica.

Rogers was lifelong friends with actresses Lucille Ball and Bette Davis. She appeared with Ball in an episode of "Here's Lucy" on November 22, 1971, in which Rogers danced the Charleston for the first time in many years. Rogers starred in one of the earliest films co-directed and co-scripted by a woman, Wanda Tuchock's "Finishing School" (1934). Rogers maintained a close friendship with her cousin, writer/socialite Phyllis Fraser, wife of Random House publisher Bennett Cerf, but was not Rita Hayworth's natural cousin, as has been reported. Hayworth's maternal uncle, Vinton Hayworth, was married to Rogers' maternal aunt, Jean Owens.

She was raised a Christian Scientist and remained a lifelong adherent. She devoted a great deal of time in her autobiography to the importance of her faith throughout her career. Rogers was a lifelong member of the Republican Party.

Rogers' mother died in 1977. Rogers remained at the 4-Rs (Rogers' Rogue River Ranch) until 1990, when she sold the property and moved to nearby Medford, Oregon.

The City of Independence, Missouri, designated the birthplace of Ginger Rogers an Historic Landmark Property in 1994. On July 16, 1994, Ginger and her secretary Roberta Olden visited Independence, Missouri to appear at the Ginger Rogers' Day celebration presented by the city. Ginger was present when mayor Ron Stewart affixed an Historic Landmark Property plaque to the front of the house where she was born on July 16, 1911. She signed over 2,000 autographs at this event. The home is currently being restored and will be open to the public in 2018. An annual Ginger Rogers Day Festival is held in July in Independence. The current owner of the house is Three Trails Cottages, Inc. and the museum director is Marge Padgitt. Plans have begun for a second building to accommodate Ginger Rogers memorabilia. 

She made her last public appearance on March 18, 1995, when she received the Women's International Center (WIC) Living Legacy Award. For many years, Rogers regularly supported, and held in-person presentations, at the Craterian Theater, in Medford, where she had performed in 1926 as a vaudevillian. The theater was comprehensively restored in 1997 and posthumously renamed in her honor as the Craterian Ginger Rogers Theater.

Rogers spent winters in Rancho Mirage and summers in Medford. She continued making public appearances (chiefly at award shows) until suffering a stroke that left her partially paralyzed and dependent on a wheelchair. Despite her stroke, she was a practitioner of Christian Science and never saw a doctor or went to a hospital. Her last husband, William Marshall, would trick Rogers to take insulin since she was diagnosed as a Type 1 Diabetic at age 22. He stated he was injecting vitamins and she took the daily injections and knew it was insulin after the divorce. She lapsed into a diabetic coma and she was hospitalized where she suffered a stroke and complications of lifelong noncompliance with her diabetes. She died at her Rancho Mirage home on April 25, 1995, at the age of 83. An autopsy concluded that the cause of death was a heart attack. She was cremated and her ashes interred in the Oakwood Memorial Park Cemetery in Chatsworth, California, with her mother's remains.






</doc>
<doc id="3741746" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3741746" title="Emma Stone">
Emma Stone

Emily Jean Stone (born November 6, 1988) is an American actress. Currently, she is the highest-paid actress in the world, and has received such accolades as an Academy Award, a BAFTA Award, a Golden Globe, and three Screen Actors Guild Awards. Stone appeared in "Forbes" Celebrity 100 in 2013 and the "Time" 100 in 2017, and has been described by the media as one of the most talented actresses of her generation.

Born and raised in Scottsdale, Arizona, Stone began acting as a child, in a theater production of "The Wind in the Willows" in 2000. As a teenager, she relocated to Los Angeles with her mother, and made her television debut in "In Search of the New Partridge Family" (2004), a reality show that produced only an unsold pilot. After small television roles, she made her film debut in "Superbad" (2007), and received positive media attention for her role in "Zombieland" (2009). The 2010 teen comedy "Easy A" was Stone's first starring role which earned her nominations for the BAFTA Rising Star Award and a Golden Globe Award for Best Actress. This breakthrough was followed with further success in the romantic comedy "Crazy, Stupid, Love" and the drama "The Help" (both 2011).

Stone gained wider recognition for playing Gwen Stacy in the 2012 superhero film "The Amazing Spider-Man", and its sequel in 2014. She was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress for the role of a recovering drug addict in the black comedy-drama "Birdman" (2014). Her Broadway debut came in a revival of the musical "Cabaret" (2014–2015). Stone won an Academy Award for Best Actress for playing an aspiring actress in the highly successful musical film "La La Land" (2016). Her portrayal of Billie Jean King in the 2017 biographical sports film "Battle of the Sexes" earned her a fourth Golden Globe nomination.

Emily Jean Stone was born on November 6, 1988, in Scottsdale, Arizona, to Krista Jean Stone ("née" Yeager), a homemaker, and Jeffrey Charles Stone, the founder and CEO of a general-contracting company. Stone lived on the grounds of the Camelback Inn resort from the age of 12 to 15. She has a younger brother, Spencer. Her paternal grandfather, Conrad Ostberg Sten, was from a Swedish family that anglicized their surname to "Stone" when they immigrated to the United States through Ellis Island. She also has German, English, Scottish, and Irish ancestry.
As an infant, Stone had baby colic and cried frequently; she consequently developed nodules and calluses on her vocal cords while she was a child. Stone has described herself as having been "loud" and "bossy" while growing up. She was educated at Sequoya Elementary School and attended Cocopah Middle School for the sixth grade. Although she did not like school, she has stated that her controlling nature meant that "I made sure I got all As". Stone suffered panic attacks as a child, which she says caused a decline in her social skills. She underwent therapy but states that it was her participation in local theater plays that helped cure the attacks.

Stone started acting at age four; she wanted a career in sketch comedy initially, but shifted her focus toward musical theater, and took voice lessons for several years. Her acting debut, at the age of 11, came in a stage production of "The Wind in the Willows", playing the part of Otter. The actress was homeschooled for two years, during which time she appeared in sixteen productions at Phoenix's Valley Youth Theatre—including "The Princess and the Pea", "Alice's Adventures in Wonderland", and "Joseph and the Amazing Technicolor Dreamcoat"—and performed with the theater's improvisational comedy troupe. Around this time, she traveled to Los Angeles and auditioned unsuccessfully for a role in Nickelodeon's "All That". Her parents later sent her for private acting lessons with a local acting coach, who had worked at the William Morris Agency in the 1970s.

Stone attended Xavier College Preparatoryan all-girl Catholic high schoolas a freshman, but dropped out after one semester to become an actress. She prepared a PowerPoint presentation for her parents titled "Project Hollywood" (featuring Madonna's 2003 song "Hollywood") to convince them to let her move to California to pursue an acting career. In January 2004, she moved with her mother to an apartment in Los Angeles. She recalls: "I went up for every single show on the Disney Channel and auditioned to play the daughter on every single sitcom", adding, "I ended up getting none." Between auditions for roles, she enrolled in online high-school classes, and worked part-time at a dog-treat bakery.

When Stone registered for the Screen Actors Guild, the name "Emily Stone" was already taken. "Riley Stone" was the stage name she chose initially, but after guest-starring in the NBC drama "Medium" and the Fox sitcom "Malcolm in the Middle", she decided that she was more comfortable with "Emma". She made her television debut as Laurie Partridge on the VH1 talent competition reality show "In Search of the New Partridge Family" (2004). The resulting show, retitled "The New Partridge Family" (2004), remained an unsold pilot. She followed this with a guest appearance in Louis C.K.'s HBO series "Lucky Louie". She auditioned to star as Claire Bennet in the NBC science fiction drama "Heroes" (2007) but was unsuccessful and later called this her "rock bottom" experience. In April 2007, she played Violet Trimble in the Fox action drama "Drive", but the show was canceled after seven episodes.

Stone made her feature film debut in Greg Mottola's comedy "Superbad" (2007), co-starring Michael Cera and Jonah Hill. The film tells the story of two high school students who go through a series of comic misadventures after they plan to buy alcohol for a party. To play the role of Hill's romantic interest, she dyed her hair red. A reviewer for "The Hollywood Reporter" found her "appealing", but felt that her role was poorly written. Stone has described the experience of acting in her first film as "amazing ... [but] very different than other experiences I've had since then". The film was a commercial success, and earned her the Young Hollywood Award for Exciting New Face.

The following year, Stone starred in the comedy "The Rocker" (2008) playing Amelia Stone, the "straight face" bass guitarist in a band; she learned to play the bass for the role. The actress, who describes herself as "a big smiler and laugher", has admitted that she found it difficult portraying a character whose personality traits were so different from her own. The film, and her performance, received negative reviews from critics and was a commercial failure. Her next release, the romantic comedy "The House Bunny", performed better at the box-office, becoming a moderate commercial success. The film sees her play the president of a sorority, and perform a cover version of the Waitresses' 1982 song "I Know What Boys Like". Reviews for the film were generally negative, though she was praised for her supporting role, and "TV Guide" Ken Fox wrote of Stone that: "She's positively incandescent, lighting up a movie that would be pretty dim without her."

Stone appeared in three films released in 2009. The first of these was opposite Matthew McConaughey, Jennifer Garner and Michael Douglas in Mark Waters' "Ghosts of Girlfriends Past". Loosely based on Charles Dickens' 1843 novella "A Christmas Carol", the romantic comedy has her playing a ghost who haunts her former boyfriend. Critical reaction to the film was negative, though it was a modest commercial success. Her most financially profitable venture that year was Ruben Fleischer's $102.3 million-grossing horror comedy film "Zombieland", in which she features alongside Jesse Eisenberg, Woody Harrelson and Abigail Breslin. In the film, she appeared as a con artist and survivor of a zombie apocalypse, in a role which "Empire" Chris Hewitt found to be "somewhat underwritten". In a more positive review, the critic for "The Daily Telegraph" wrote: "[T]he hugely promising Stone... [is] a tough cookie who projects the aura of being wiser than her years." Stone's final release in 2009 was Kieran and Michelle Mulroney's "Paper Man", a comedy-drama which disappointed critics.

Stone provided the voice of an Australian Shepherd in "Marmaduke" (2010), a comedy from director Tom Dey, which is based on Brad Anderson's long-running comic strip of the same name. Her breakthrough came the same year with a starring role in "Easy A", a teen comedy directed by Will Gluck. Partially based on Nathaniel Hawthorne's 1850 historical romance novel "The Scarlet Letter", the film tells the story of Olive Penderghast (Stone), a high school student who becomes embroiled in a comic sex scandal after a false rumor circulates that she is sexually promiscuous. Stone read the script before the project was optioned for production, and pursued it with her manager while production details were being finalized. She found the script "so different and unique from anything I'd read before", saying that it was "funny and sweet". When Stone discovered that the film had begun production, she met with Gluck, expressing her enthusiasm for the project. A few months later, the audition process started and she met again with Gluck, becoming one of the first actresses to audition. The film received positive critical reviews, and Stone's performance was considered its prime asset. Anna Smith of "Time Out" commented: "Stone gives a terrific performance, her knowing drawl implying intellect and indifference with underlying warmth." With a total box office of $75 million, the film was a commercial success. Stone was nominated for a BAFTA Rising Star Award and a Golden Globe Award for Best Actress in a Musical or Comedy, and won the MTV Movie Award for Best Comedic Performance.

In October 2010, Stone hosted an episode of NBC's late-night sketch comedy "Saturday Night Live"; her appearances included a sketch playing off her resemblance to Lindsay Lohan. Stone described it as "the greatest week of my life". She hosted it again in 2011, appeared in an episode in 2014, and in its 40th anniversary special in 2015. A brief appearance in the sex comedy "Friends with Benefits" (2011) reunited her with Gluck. She followed this with a supporting role in Glenn Ficarra and John Requa's romantic comedy "Crazy, Stupid, Love" (2011) alongside Steve Carell, Ryan Gosling and Julianne Moore. The film features her as a law school graduate, and the love interest of Gosling's character. Despite finding "some inevitable collapses into convention" in the film, Drew McWeeny of HitFix wrote that Stone "ties the whole film together". At the 2012 Teen Choice Awards, she won the Choice Movie Actress – Comedy award for her performance in the film. "Crazy, Stupid, Love" was a box office success, grossing $142.9 million worldwide with a production budget of $50 million.

Disillusioned at being typecast as the "sarcastic interest of the guy", Stone co-starred with Viola Davis in Tate Taylor's period drama "The Help" (2011), a film she found to be challenging. The film is based on Kathryn Stockett's 2009 novel of the same name and is set in 1960s Jackson, Mississippi. She met with Taylor to express a desire to work in the film. Taylor has said: "Emma was completely awkward and dorky, with her raspy voice, and she sat down and we got a little intoxicated and had a blast, and I just thought, 'God! God! This is Skeeter." She was cast as Eugenia "Skeeter" Phelan, an aspiring writer learning about the lives of the African-American maids. In preparation for the part, she trained to speak in a Southern dialect; she also educated herself on the Civil Rights Movement through literature and film. With a worldwide gross of $216 million against a budget of $25 million, "The Help" became Stone's most commercially successful film to that point. The film, and her performance, received positive reviews from critics. Writing for "Empire", Anna Smith thought that Stone was "well-meaning and hugely likable" despite finding flaws in the character. The film was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Picture, and won Best Ensemble Cast from the Women Film Critics Circle and the Broadcast Film Critics Association.

Stone declined a role in the action comedy film "21 Jump Street" after signing on to Marc Webb's 2012 film "The Amazing Spider-Man", a reboot of Sam Raimi's "Spider-Man" series. She portrayed Gwen Stacy, the love interest of the title character (played by Andrew Garfield). Stone returned to a blond hair color for the role, having dyed it red previously. She told "The Vancouver Sun" that she felt responsible to educate herself about Spider-Man and admitted that she had not read the comics: "My experience was with the Sam Raimi movies ... I always assumed that Mary Jane was his first love", adding that she was only familiar with Stacy's character from Bryce Dallas Howard's portrayal in "Spider-Man 3". "The Amazing Spider-Man" was a commercial success and was the seventh highest-grossing film of 2012 with global revenues of $757.9 million. "Entertainment Weekly" Lisa Schwarzbaum found Stone "irresistible", and Ian Freer of "Empire" magazine was particularly impressed with Stone's and Garfield's performances. At the annual People's Choice Awards ceremony, she was nominated for three awards, including Favorite Movie Actress. Later that year, Stone voiced a role in the crime-based video game, "Sleeping Dogs", which earned her a Spike Video Game Award for Best Performance by a Human Female nomination.

Stone began 2013 with a voice role in DreamWorks' "The Croods", an animated feature nominated for an Academy Award for Best Animated Feature. This followed with an appearance in "Movie 43", an anthology film which consists of sixteen short stories—she played the title role in the segment entitled "Veronica". The actress collaborated with Ryan Gosling and Sean Penn in Ruben Fleischer's "Gangster Squad" (2013), a crime thriller set in Los Angeles during the 1940s. "The New York Times" A. O. Scott dismissed the film as "a hectic jumble of fedoras and zoot suits", but praised her pairing with Gosling. Stone expressed a desire to work with Gosling on more projects.

In 2014, Stone reprised the role of Gwen Stacy in "The Amazing Spider-Man 2". In an interview with "Total Film", the actress explained that her character was not dependent on the film's protagonist. "She saves him more than he saves her. She's incredibly helpful to Spider-Man ... He's the muscle, she's the brains." Her performance was well received by critics; an "Empire" reviewer praised her for standing out in the film: "Stone is the Heath Ledger of this series, doing something unexpected with an easily dismissed supporting character." The role earned her the Favorite Movie Actress award at the 2015 Kids' Choice Awards. Later that year, Stone took on a role in Woody Allen's romantic comedy "Magic in the Moonlight", a modest commercial success. A. O. Scott criticized her role, and pairing with Colin Firth, describing it as "the kind of pedantic nonsense that is meant to signify superior intellect".

The black comedy-drama "Birdman", from director Alejandro González Iñárritu, was Stone's final film release in 2014. Co-starring Michael Keaton and Edward Norton, the film features her in the role of Sam Thomson, the recovering-addict daughter of actor Riggan Thomson (Keaton), who becomes his assistant. Iñárritu created the character based on his experience with his daughter. "Birdman" was critically acclaimed, and was the most successful film at the 87th Academy Awards; it was nominated for nine awards, winning four, including Best Picture. The Movie Network considered it one of Stone's best performances to date and Robbie Collin of "The Daily Telegraph" was impressed with a monologue she delivers, which he thought was "like a knitting needle to the gut". She received numerous accolades for her portrayal, including nominations for an Academy, a BAFTA, a Golden Globe, a Screen Actors Guild, and a Critics' Choice Movie award for Best Supporting Actress.

From November 2014 to February 2015, Stone starred in a revival of the Broadway musical "Cabaret" as Sally Bowles, taking over the role from Michelle Williams. Considering it to be "the most nerve-racking thing ever", Stone told the "Entertainment Weekly" magazine that she listened to a French radio station to mentally prepare herself for the role. "Variety"s Marilyn Stasio was critical of her singing and found her performance "a bit narrow as an emotional platform, but a smart choice for her acting skills, the perfect fit for her sharp intelligence and kinetic energy." Both of Stone's 2015 filmsthe romantic comedy-drama "Aloha", and the mystery drama "Irrational Man"were critical and commercial failures, and her roles were panned by critics. In Cameron Crowe's "Aloha", she took on the role of an Asian-American air force pilot alongside Bradley Cooper, and in the Woody Allen-directed "Irrational Man", she portrayed the romantic interest of Joaquin Phoenix's character, a philosophy professor. The former was controversial for whitewashing the cast; Stone later regretted the project, acknowledging whitewashing as a widespread problem in Hollywood. Despite the criticism, she was nominated for Choice Movie Actress – Comedy at the 2015 Teen Choice Awards.

Stone reunited with Gosling in their third film togetherDamien Chazelle's musical comedy-drama "La La Land"in which she played Mia Dolan, an aspiring actress living in Los Angeles. Stone borrowed several real-life experiences for her character, and in preparation, watched "The Umbrellas of Cherbourg" and films of Fred Astaire and Ginger Rogers. For the musical's soundtrack, she recorded six songs—"Another Day of Sun", "City of Stars", "Someone in the Crowd", "A Lovely Night", "Audition (The Fools Who Dream)" and "City of Stars (Humming)". "La La Land" served as the opening film at the 2016 Venice Film Festival; it received highly positive reviews, and Stone won the Volpi Cup for Best Actress. She also received an Academy, BAFTA, Golden Globe and a SAG award for Best Actress. Writing for "The Guardian", Peter Bradshaw reviewed, "Stone has never been better: superbly smart, witty, vulnerable, her huge doe eyes radiating intelligence even, or especially, when they are filling with tears." Besides being Stone's highest-rated film on the review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, "La La Land" was successful at the box office, earning over $440 million against its $30 million budget.

Stone's sole film of 2017 was the sports drama "Battle of the Sexes", based on the 1973 match between tennis players Billie Jean King (Stone) and Bobby Riggs (Steve Carell). In preparation, Stone met with King, watched old footage and interviews of her, trained with a dialect coach to speak in King's accent, and drank high-calorie protein shakes to gain . The film premiered at the 2017 Toronto International Film Festival. Some critics considered it Stone's best performance of her career. In a mixed review for the film, Benjamin Lee of "The Guardian" praised Stone for getting outside her comfort zone, and giving a "strong" and "convincing" performance. She received her fourth Golden Globe nomination for it, and attended the Golden Globes with King as a guest. However, the film earned less than its $25 million budget.

As of September 2017, Stone will star as Abigail Masham in Yorgos Lanthimos historical drama "The Favourite". She is also set to star in the drama "Love May Fail", based on Matthew Quick's 2015 novel and as Cruella de Vil in a live-action spin-off of "One Hundred and One Dalmatians". Stone will star in and act as an executive producer for the upcoming Netflix series "Maniac", co-starring Jonah Hill and directed by Cary Fukunaga, which began principal photography in August 2017.

Stone moved from Los Angeles to Greenwich Village, New York City, in 2009. In 2016, she moved back to Los Angeles. Despite frequent media coverage, the actress has refused to speak about her private life. Concerned with living a "normal" life, she has said that she finds little value in media attention. She has expressed her fondness for her profession, and has cited actress Diane Keaton as an influence, who is (in Stone's words) "one of the most covered-up actresses of all time". She has also named actress and singer-songwriter Marion Cotillard as one of her inspirations.

Stone has a close relationship with her family. She says: "I am blessed with a great family and great people around me that would be able to kick me in the shins if I ever for one minute got lost up in the clouds. I've been really lucky in that sense." During the production of "The Amazing Spider-Man" in 2010, Stone dated co-star Andrew Garfield. The nature of their relationship was well-documented by the media, with frequent speculation about an impending engagement or a break-up. The couple refused to talk about it publicly, though they made several appearances together. In 2015, they were reported to have broken up.

According to Stone, she suffers from asthma, which she discovered after having difficulty breathing while filming "Easy A". Her mother was diagnosed with triple-negative breast cancer and was cured in 2008. Stone and her mother celebrated by getting tattoos of birds' feet, designed by Paul McCartney, a reference to the Beatles' "Blackbird", which is a song she and her mother love. She appeared in a Revlon campaign that promoted breast cancer awareness. In 2011, the actress featured in a collaborative video between "Star Wars" and Stand Up to Cancer, which aimed to raise funds for cancer research. Two years later, she attended an event by Gilda's Club, an organization working for a similar purpose. From 2012 to 2014, she hosted the Entertainment Industry Foundation's Revlon Run/Walk, which helps fight women's cancer.

Stone, alongside three other celebrities, was present at the 2012 Nickelodeon HALO Awards, a television special that profiled five teenagers who are "Helping And Leading Others" (HALO). In 2014, on an occasion in New York, Stone and Garfield encouraged paparazzi to visit websites, which spread awareness of causes, such as autism. She attended the 2014 Earth Hour, a worldwide movement for the planet organized by the World Wide Fund for Nature. In 2015, she was part of a fundraising event in support of the Motion Picture & Television Fund, which helps people in the television and film industry with limited or no resources. In 2018, she collaborated with 300 women in Hollywood to set up the Time's Up initiative to protect women from harassment and discrimination.

Several media publications consider Stone one of her generation's most talented actresses. Commenting on her performance in "The Help", Kirk Honeycutt of "The Hollywood Reporter" called her "one of our very best young actresses". She is known for starring both in high-profile, mainstream productions and in low-budget independent films. "Time" Daniel D'Addario describes the latter as "substantive risk" and adds that taking on a role in them provides her an opportunity to "try something new and to get credibility". Analyzing her on-screen persona, Jessica Kiang of Indiewire noted that Stone "usually [plays] the approachable, down-to-earth, girl-next-door type, [and] in person she demonstrates many of those qualities too, along with an absolute refusal to take herself too seriously."

As her career in Hollywood films has developed, Stone has become a successful and popular actress. In 2008, she topped "Saturday Night Magazine" Top 20 Rising Stars Under 30 and was included in a similar list compiled by Moviefone. LoveFilm placed her on their list of 2010 Top 20 Actresses Under 30, and her performance in "Easy A" was included in "Time" Top 10 Everything of 2010. She appeared in the 2013 Celebrity 100, a compilation of the 100 most powerful people in the world, as selected annually by "Forbes". The magazine reported that she had earned $16 million from June 2012 to June 2013. That same year, she was ranked first in the magazine's Top 10 Best Value Stars. In 2015, "Forbes" published that she had become one of the highest-paid actresses with earnings of $6.5 million. The magazine would rank her as the world's highest-paid actress two years later with yearly earnings of $26 million. In 2017, she was featured by "Time" as one of the 100 most influential people in the world.

Stone is considered a style iconthe media cites her hair, eyes, and husky voice as her trademarks. "Vogue" credits the actress for her "sophisticated, perfectly put-together looks", writing that "her charisma, both on-screen and off-, has charmed many." In 2009, she featured in AskMen's Top 99 Women, "FHM" 100 Sexiest Women in the World, and "Maxim" magazine's Hot 100; the latter also placed her on the list on three other occasions2010, 2011, and 2014. She continued to be featured in AskMen's annual beauty lists from 2010 to 2015, ranking among the top forty each year. In 2011, she appeared in Victoria's Secret's list of What is Sexy? as the Sexiest Actress. She was mentioned in several other media outlet lists that year, including "People" magazine's 100 Most Beautiful Women, each of "FHM" and "FHM Australia" 100 Sexiest Women in the World, and "Men's Health" magazine's 100 Hottest Women. She ranked sixth on "Empire" list of the 100 Sexiest Movie Stars in 2013. Stone was named the best dressed woman of 2012 by "Vogue" magazine and was featured in similar listings by "Glamour" in 2013 and 2015, and "People" in 2014. In 2017, Buzznet named her one of the world's most beautiful women.

According to the review aggregator site Rotten Tomatoes and the box-office site Box Office Mojo, Stone's most critically acclaimed and commercially successful films are "Superbad" (2007), "Zombieland" (2009), "Easy A" (2010), "Crazy, Stupid, Love" (2011), "The Help" (2011), "The Amazing Spider-Man" (2012), "The Amazing Spider-Man 2" (2014), "Birdman" (2014), and "La La Land" (2016).

Stone has been nominated for two Academy Awards: Best Supporting Actress for "Birdman" and Best Actress for "La La Land" and three British Academy Film Awards: BAFTA Rising Star Award, Best Supporting Actress for "Birdman", and Best Actress in a Leading Role for "La La Land", winning both of her nominations for "La La Land". She won Best Actress in a Comedy or Musical at the 74th Golden Globe Awards and Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Leading Role for her role in "La La Land".




</doc>
<doc id="2539269" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2539269" title="Marion Cotillard">
Marion Cotillard

Marion Cotillard () is a French actress, singer-songwriter, musician, environmentalist, and spokesperson for Greenpeace who achieved international fame with the film "La Vie en Rose" (2007). She is the recipient of an Academy Award, a BAFTA Award, a Golden Globe Award, two César Awards, a European Award, and a Lumières Award. Cotillard has appeared in more than 50 feature films and is also known for being the face of Lady Dior handbags since 2008. She became a Knight of the Order of Arts and Letters in France in 2010 and promoted to Officer in 2016. She was named "The Most Bankable French Actress of the 21st Century" in 2014, and described as "the great silent film actress of our time" by Robbie Collin of "The Daily Telegraph" for her ability to show emotions only with her eyes and facial expressions, although she has never appeared in a silent film. She received France's highest honor and was made a Knight of the Legion of Honour in 2016.

Cotillard had her first English-language role in the TV series "" in 1993, made her film debut in "The Story of a Boy Who Wanted to Be Kissed" (1994), her first leading role in the TV film "Chloé" (1996), and made her breakthrough in France playing Lilly Bertineau in the action-comedy "Taxi" (1998), which earned her a César Award nomination for Most Promising Actress and was her first box office hit. She made her Hollywood debut as Joséphine Bloom in Tim Burton's "Big Fish" (2003).

Since 2003, Cotillard has alternated between French and English-language roles in mainstream and art-house productions, and has received international acclaim and awards for her performances in films such as Tina Lombardi in "A Very Long Engagement" (2004), for which she won her first César Award for Best Supporting Actress. For her portrayal of the French singer Édith Piaf in the biopic "La Vie en Rose" (2007), Cotillard achieved worldwide recognition and won her second César Award, a BAFTA Award, a Golden Globe Award, a Lumières Award and the Academy Award for Best Actress, becoming the first and (as of 2018) only actor to win an Academy Award for a performance in French, and also the second actress and one of only six actors to have won this award for a part spoken in a foreign language. Her performance of Luisa Contini in the musical film "Nine" (2009), earned her a second Golden Globe nomination. She next starred in Michael Mann's "Public Enemies" (2009) as Billie Frechette, and played Mal in Christopher Nolan's "Inception" (2010).

In 2012, she received widespread critical acclaim for her performance as the double amputee orca trainer Stéphanie in "Rust and Bone" (2012), and was nominated for the Golden Globes, BAFTAs, Critics' Choice, Screen Actors Guild and the César Awards. She was highly acclaimed and awarded for her lead performances in "The Immigrant" (2013) and "Two Days, One Night" (2014), receiving a second Academy Award nomination for Best Actress for the latter, which was also her second nomination for a French-language film and the first time an actor was nominated for a Belgian film. Cotillard became one of only six actors to receive multiple Academy Award nominations for foreign-language performances.

Cotillard played Joan of Arc on stage in different countries between 2005 and 2015 in the oratorio "Jeanne d'Arc au bûcher". Her English-language roles include Fanny Chenal in "A Good Year" (2006), Adriana in "Midnight in Paris" (2011), Dr. Leonora Orantes in "Contagion" (2011), Miranda Tate in "The Dark Knight Rises" (2012), Lady Macbeth in "Macbeth" (2015), Marianne Beausejour in "Allied" (2016) and Dr. Sofia Rikkin in "Assassin's Creed" (2016). She provided voice acting for animated films as The Rose in "The Little Prince" (2015), April in "April and the Extraordinary World" (2015) and Scarlet Overkill in the French version of "Minions" (2015). Her other notable French and Belgian films include "La Belle Verte" (1996), "Furia" (1999), "War in the Highlands" (1999), "Lisa" (2001), "Pretty Things" (2001), "Love Me If You Dare" (2003), "Innocence" (2004), "Toi et Moi" (2006) and "Dikkenek" (2006).

Cotillard was born in Paris, and grew up around Orléans, in an artistically inclined, "bustling, creative household". Her father, Jean-Claude Cotillard, is an actor, teacher, former mime, and 2006 Molière Award-winning director, of Breton descent. Cotillard's mother, , who has Kabyle ancestry, is also an actress and drama teacher. Her two younger brothers, Quentin and Guillaume, are twins. Guillaume is a screenwriter and director. Cotillard began acting during her childhood, appearing in one of her father's plays.

After small appearances and performances in theatre, Cotillard had occasional, minor roles in television series such as "" – where she had her first English-speaking role aged 17, appearing as Lori Bellian in the episode "Nowhere to Run"; she also had an uncredited role in the episode "Saving Grace", in which she appeared giving birth.

Her career as a film actress began in the mid-1990s with minor roles in films like Philippe Harel's "The Story of a Boy Who Wanted to Be Kissed", which was her feature film debut at the age of 18; in Arnaud Desplechin's "My Sex Life... or How I Got into an Argument", and the comedy "La Belle Verte", directed by Coline Serreau.

In 1996, Cotillard had her first leading role in the TV film "Chloé", directed by Dennis Berry, with Cotillard playing the title role, a teenage runaway who is forced into prostitution, co-starring Anna Karina.

In 1998, she appeared in Gérard Pirès' action comedy "Taxi", playing Lilly Bertineau, the girlfriend of delivery boy Daniel, played by Samy Naceri. The film was a hit in France and she was nominated for a César Award for Most Promising Actress. Cotillard reprised the role in two sequels: "Taxi 2" and "Taxi 3".

She then ventured into science fiction with Alexandre Aja's post-apocalyptic romantic drama, "Furia" in 1999. That same year, Cotillard starred in the Swiss war drama film "War in the Highlands" ("La Guerre dans le Haut Pays"), for which she won the Best Actress Award at the Autrans Film Festival in 1999.

In 2001, she appeared in Pierre Grimblat's film "Lisa", playing the title role and younger version of Jeanne Moreau's character, co-starring with Benoît Magimel and Sagamore Stévenin. In the same year, she starred in Gilles Paquet-Brenner's film "Pretty Things" ("Les Jolies Choses"), adapted from the work of feminist writer Virginie Despentes. In the drama, Cotillard portrayed twins of completely opposite characters, Lucie and Marie, and she was nominated for a César Award for Most Promising Actress for her performances.

In 2002, Cotillard starred in Guillaume Nicloux's thriller "A Private Affair" ("Une Affaire Privée"), in which she portrayed the mysterious Clarisse.

In 2003, Cotillard had a notable supporting role in Tim Burton's film "Big Fish" playing Joséphine, the French wife of Billy Crudup's character, William Bloom. "Big Fish" was her first American film and she appeared alongside Helena Bonham Carter, Albert Finney, Ewan McGregor, Jessica Lange and Allison Lohman, In the same year, she starred in the French romantic comedy film "Love Me If You Dare" ("Jeux d'enfants"), as Sophie Kowalsky, the daughter of Polish immigrants. The film was directed by Yann Samuel and was a box office hit in France.

In 2004, she won the Chopard Trophy of Female Revelation at the Cannes Film Festival. She also appeared in two critically acclaimed films: Jean-Pierre Jeunet's "A Very Long Engagement" ("Un Long Dimanche de Fiançailles"), as the vengeful Tina Lombardi, for which she won a César Award for Best Supporting Actress, and the mystery thriller "Innocence", as Mademoiselle Éva.

In 2005, Cotillard starred in six films: Steve Suissa's romantic drama "Cavalcade" as Alizée; in Abel Ferrara's religious drama "Mary", alongside Forest Whitaker and Juliette Binoche; portrayed Isabelle Kruger and Alice in the thriller film "The Black Box" ("La Boîte Noire"), directed by Richard Berry; starred in the romantic comedy "Love Is in the Air" ("Ma vie en l'air"); in the drama "Burnt Out" ("Sauf le respect que je vous dois") and "Edy", directed by Stéphan Guérin-Tillié.

In 2006, the actress starred in four films, including Ridley Scott's romantic comedy "A Good Year", in which she portrayed Fanny Chenal, a French café owner in a small Provençal town, opposite Russell Crowe as a Londoner who inherits a local property. She played Nadine in the Belgian comedy "Dikkenek" alongside Mélanie Laurent; also appeared in "Fair Play" as Nicole, and in the satirical coming-of-age film "Toi et moi", for which she learned to play the cello for her role.

Cotillard was chosen by director Olivier Dahan to portray the French singer Édith Piaf in the biopic "La Vie en Rose", before he had even met her, saying that he noticed a similarity between Piaf's and Cotillard's eyes. Producer Alain Goldman accepted and defended the choice even though distributors TFM reduced the money they gave to finance the film thinking Cotillard wasn't "bankable" enough an actress. Her portrayal was widely praised, including by the eminent theatre director Sir Trevor Nunn, who described it as "one of the greatest performances on film ever." At the Berlin International Film Festival, where the film premiered, Cotillard was given a 15-minute standing ovation. Powerful Hollywood talent agent, Hylda Queally, signed Cotillard shortly after "La Vie en Rose" premiered at the Berlin Film Festival.

"La Vie en Rose" was dubbed "the most awaited film of 2007" in France, where some critics said that Cotillard had reincarnated Édith Piaf to sing one last time on stage. The film was a box office hit in France, gathering over 5 million admissions and grossing $86 million worldwide on a $25 million budget.

Cotillard is the first actress to win a Golden Globe for a foreign language performance since 1972, when Liv Ullmann won for "The Emigrants". She is also the first person to win a (Comedy or Musical) Golden Globe for a foreign language performance. On 10 February 2008, Cotillard became the first French actress to be awarded the BAFTA Award for Best Actress in a Leading Role since Stéphane Audran in 1973.

On 22 February 2008, she was awarded the César Award for Best Actress for her performance in "La Vie en Rose". Alain Delon presented the award and announced the winner as "La Môme Marion" (The Kid Marion), also praising her on stage saying: "Marion, I give you this César. I think this César is for a great great actress, and I know what I'm talking about". Two days later, on 24 February 2008 at the Academy Awards, she won Best Actress, becoming the first woman and second person (after Adrien Brody, "The Pianist") to win both a César and an Oscar for the same performance. Cotillard is the second French cinema actress to win this award and the third overall to receive an Academy Award after Simone Signoret in 1960 and Juliette Binoche in 1997. She is the first Best Actress winner in a non-English language performance since Sophia Loren's win in 1961. She is also the first and (as of 2018) only winner of an Academy Award for a performance in the French language. In her Oscar acceptance speech, Cotillard proclaimed "thank you life, thank you love" and, speaking of Los Angeles, said "it is true, there is some angels "(sic)" in this city!" The day following the ceremony, Cotillard was congratulated and praised by the President of France, Nicolas Sarkozy, in a statement saying,

"La Vie En Rose" was partly a Czech production, as Cotillard mentioned in her César acceptance speech. On 1 March 2008, Cotillard won a Czech Lion Award for Best Actress. She could not attend the ceremony in Prague due to the filming of "Public Enemies". Her friend Pavlína Němcová – who played the journalist in "La vie en Rose" – was there to accept the award on her behalf.

Cotillard won a total of 27 awards for her performance in "La Vie en Rose".

On 24 June 2008, Cotillard was one of 105 individuals invited to join the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences.

In 2009, Cotillard starred alongside Johnny Depp and Christian Bale in the role of Billie Frechette in Michael Mann's "Public Enemies", which was released in the United States on 1 July 2009. Later that year, she appeared in the film adaptation of the musical "Nine", directed by Rob Marshall, playing Luisa Contini, the wife of Guido, played by Daniel Day-Lewis. In the film, Cotillard performs two musical numbers: ""My Husband Makes Movies"" and ""Take It All"". 
As of 2018, the official music video for the song ""Take It All"" performed by Cotillard, has over 1,7 million views on YouTube. On 15 December 2009, Cotillard was nominated for a Golden Globe for Best Actress in a Motion Picture – Musical or Comedy for her performance in "Nine". Cotillard appeared on the cover of the November 2009 issue of "Vogue" with her "Nine" co-stars, and on the July 2010 cover by herself.

"TIME" ranked Cotillard's performance in "Nine" as the fifth best performance by a female in 2009, behind Mo'Nique, Carey Mulligan, Saoirse Ronan and Meryl Streep. She was awarded the Desert Palm Achievement Actress Award at the 2010 Palm Springs International Film Festival for her performance in the film – her second prize from the festival.

On 27 February 2010, she was the Honorary President of the 35th César Awards Ceremony.

She played Mal Cobb, a projection of Leonardo DiCaprio's character, Dom Cobb's deceased wife in Christopher Nolan's film "Inception", also starring Tom Hardy, Joseph Gordon-Levitt, Cillian Murphy, Ken Watanabe, Michael Caine and Ellen Page, which released on 16 July 2010. Nolan described Mal as "the essence of the femme fatale", and DiCaprio praised Cotillard's performance saying that "she can be strong and vulnerable and hopeful and heartbreaking all in the same moment, which was perfect for all the contradictions of her character". Cotillard and Leonardo DiCaprio ranked No. 8 on Forbes' list of ""Hollywood's Top Earning On-Screen Couples"" for "Inception", which made $825 million at the worldwide box-office. They are the only couple from a non-franchise film. In the same year, she also starred in Guillaume Canet's drama "Little White Lies" ("Les petits mouchoirs"), playing the environmentalist Marie, alongside Jean Dujardin and François Cluzet.

In 2011, she starred in Woody Allen's "Midnight in Paris" alongside Rachel McAdams, Owen Wilson and Kathy Bates. In the film, Cotillard played Adriana, a fictionalized mistress of Pablo Picasso with whom Owen Wilson's character, Gil, falls in love. As of 2016, "Midnight in Paris" is the highest-grossing film of Allen's career, with $151 million worldwide on a $17 million budget. She also co-starred alongside Kate Winslet, Jude Law, Gwyneth Paltrow and Matt Damon in Steven Soderbergh's thriller film "Contagion". Also that year, Cotillard appeared on the top of "Le Figaro"s list of the highest paid actors in France in 2010, the first time in nine years that a female has topped the list, and she was also tied with Kate Winslet as the highest paid foreign actress in Hollywood.

In 2012, Cotillard was ranked No. 9 on the list of the highest paid actresses in France in 2011, and appeared in Christopher Nolan's film "The Dark Knight Rises", playing Miranda Tate, a board member at Wayne Enterprises. The film reunited the actress with her "Inception" co-stars Joseph Gordon-Levitt, Michael Caine, Cillian Murphy and Tom Hardy. It also reunited her with "Public Enemies" co-star Christian Bale. She next starred in Jacques Audiard's drama "Rust and Bone" ("De rouille et d'os") alongside Matthias Schoenaerts. The film premiered at the 2012 Cannes Film Festival and received a ten-minute standing ovation at the end of its screening. Cotillard received rave reviews for her performance as the orca trainer Stéphanie, who loses her legs after an accident at work and begins a strange relationship with Schoenaerts' character. She also won the Globe de Cristal Award, Étoile d'Or Award, Sant Jordi Award, Irish Film & Television Award and the Hawaii International Film Festival Award for Best Actress and received a fifth César Award nomination, a fourth Screen Actors Guild Award nomination, a third Golden Globe nomination (her first nomination for Best Actress – Drama), a second Critics' Choice Award nomination and a second Lumières Award nomination.

Cate Blanchett wrote an op-ed for Variety praising Cotillard's performance in "Rust and Bone", describing it as "simply astonishing" and stating that "Marion has created a character of nobility and candour, seamlessly melding herself into a world we could not have known without her. Her performance is as unexpected and as unsentimental and raw as the film itself".

Also in 2012, Cotillard received several honors and career tributes at the Telluride Film Festival, Hollywood Film Festival, AFI Fest, Gotham Awards and Harper's Bazaar Awards.

In 2013, Cotillard was named Hasty Pudding Theatricals' Woman of the Year by Harvard students. She was also ranked the 2nd highest paid actress in France in 2012. In May 2013, she appeared in the controversial music video ""The Next Day"" by David Bowie, alongside Gary Oldman, her co-star in "The Dark Knight Rises".

She had her first leading role in an American movie in James Gray's "The Immigrant", starring as the Polish immigrant Ewa Cybulska, who wants to experience the American dream in 1920's New York, starring opposite Joaquin Phoenix and Jeremy Renner. James Gray wrote the movie especially for Cotillard after meeting her at a French restaurant with her boyfriend. Gray stated that Cotillard is the best actor he's ever worked with. Cotillard had to learn 20 pages of Polish dialogue for her role. Her performance was widely acclaimed at the 2013 Cannes Film Festival where the film premiered. "The Immigrant" was released in the U.S. in May 2014, exactly one year after its Cannes premiere, and was highly praised by American critics, especially Cotillard's performance, which was awarded the New York Film Critics Circle Award, the National Society of Film Critics Award, the Toronto Film Critics Association Award and was nominated for a Spirit Award for Best Actress in 2015. She then co-starred in Guillaume Canet's "Blood Ties", alongside Clive Owen, Billy Crudup and her "Rust and Bone" co-star Matthias Schoenaerts, the film premiering at Cannes in the same week that "The Immigrant" premiered. Cotillard also had a cameo in "", acting opposite Jim Carrey as a Canadian anchor in the battle scene between rival news teams.

From November to December 2013, she was a member of the jury of the 13th Marrakech Film Festival that was presided by Martin Scorsese.
In 2014, she starred in Dardenne brothers' "Two Days, One Night" ("Deux jours, une nuit"). In the film, Cotillard plays Sandra, a Belgian factory worker who has just one weekend to convince her workmates to give up their bonuses so that she can keep her job. The film premiered at the 2014 Cannes Film Festival and Cotillard's performance was unanimously praised by critics, earned a 15-minute standing ovation and was named "the best performance of the festival". For her performance in the film, Cotillard received several critics awards, a European Film Award, was nominated for a second Academy Award and for a sixth César Award.

Cotillard's performances in "The Immigrant" and "Two Days, One Night" shared the fourth spot of "TIME"s list of Best Movie Performances of 2014.

On 22 January 2014, it was announced that Cotillard would star in the New York Philharmonic's production of Arthur Honegger's oratorio ""Joan of Arc at the Stake"". Cotillard had previously starred in a production of the 1938 dramatic oratorio alongside the Orléans Orchestra in 2005 and with the Barcelona Symphony Orchestra in 2012. The new production, staged by the director Côme de Bellescize, was first created for Japan's Saito Kinen Festival Matsumoto in 2012, and featured members of the Comédie-Française. It hit the stage of the Avery Fisher Hall in June 2015. Cotillard also performed the oratorio in Paris in March 2015.

In November 2014, Cotillard participated on Comedy Central's All-Star Non-Denominational Christmas Special in a duet with Nathan Fielder singing Elvis Presley's song "Can't Help Falling in Love".

In 2015, Cotillard took on the role of Lady Macbeth in a film adaption of William Shakespeare's play Macbeth, directed by Justin Kurzel and starring Michael Fassbender in the title role. The film premiered at the Cannes Film Festival on 23 May, receiving generally positive reviews at the festival and during its release in the United Kingdom and the United States, and although her accent earned mixed reviews, Cotillard's performance still earned high praise from critics, particularly for her rendition of the famous "Out, Damned Spot" monologue. "Variety"'s critic, Guy Lodge, noted that it was a performance that "contains both the woman's abandoned self and her worst-case incarnation, often in the space of a single scene," and remarked that "Her deathless sleepwalking scene, staged in minimalist fashion under a gauze of snowflakes in a bare chapel, is played with tender, desolate exhaustion; it deserves to be viewed as near-definitive." Cotillard was nominated for the British Independent Film Award for Best Actress for her performance.

She voiced The Rose in both the English and the French version in a 3D animated adaptation of "The Little Prince", directed by Mark Osborne, was the voice of Scarlet Overkill in the French version of "Minions", and also voiced April, the lead role in the French-Canadian-Belgian 3D animated film "April and the Extraordinary World" ("Avril et le Monde Truqué"), directed by Franck Ekinci and Christian Demares.

In 2016, Cotillard played Gabrielle, the lead role in Nicole Garcia's "From the Land of the Moon" ("Mal de Pierres"), an adaptation of the bestselling Italian novel ""Mal di Pietre"" (""From the Land of the Moon"" in US, Canada and UK and ""The House in Via Manno"" in Australia) by Milena Agus. The film marked Cotillard's return to French cinema after 2012's "Rust and Bone", and earned her a seventh César Award nomination. In the same year, she played Catherine in Xavier Dolan's "It's Only the End of the World" ("Juste la fin du Monde"). Both films subsequently premiered in the main competition section of the 2016 Cannes Film Festival.

Cotillard next appeared opposite Brad Pitt in "Allied", a spy film set in World War II directed by Robert Zemeckis, in which she played Marianne Beausejour, a French Resistance fighter. It was released in the United States and France on 23 November 2016.

Cotillard re-teamed with "Macbeth" director Justin Kurzel and co-star Michael Fassbender in the movie adaptation of the video game "Assassin's Creed", which was released on 21 December 2016.

On 30 January 2017, Cotillard was honored with a special award for her career at the 22nd Lumières Awards in France.

In 2017, Cotillard starred in Arnaud Desplechin's "Ismael's Ghosts" ("Les Fantomes d'Ismaël"), alongside Mathieu Amalric, Charlotte Gainsbourg and Louis Garrel.

Cotillard sings, plays guitar, bass guitar, keyboard and tambourine.

She co-wrote and performed the song "La Fille De Joie" for her film "Pretty Things" ("Les Jolies Choses"), in which she played a singer and also performed the song "La Conne" for this film.

Canadian singer Hawksley Workman, said in interviews about his album "Between the Beautifuls", that he worked and wrote songs with Cotillard while they both were in Los Angeles during the 2007–2008 movie awards season.

In 2008, she co-wrote and performed the song "The Strong Ones" alongside Hawksley Workman for Olivier Dahan's short film for Cartier's Love range.

In 2010, Cotillard recorded the songs "Five Thousand Nights" and "Happy Crowd" with the French Rock band Yodelice for their album "Cardioid". She also went on tour with the band in different cities in France and Belgium, under the pseudonym "Simone", which is her maternal grandmother's name. In the same year, she appeared in the video "More Than Meets the Eyes" from Yodelice.

She also recorded the song "The Eyes of Mars" alongside Franz Ferdinand especially for Dior.

In 2012, she wrote and performed the song "Lily's Body" for the fourth episode of the "Lady Dior Web Documentary" with the same title.

In 2014, Cotillard wrote and performed the song "Snapshot in LA" alongside John Cameron Mitchell, Metronomy's Joseph Mount and Villaine. The song earned a music video that was written and co-directed by Cotillard herself especially for Lady Dior's campaign "Enter the Game – Dior Cuise 2015".


In 2008, Cotillard was chosen as the face of Dior's bag "Lady Dior" and was featured in an online mini-movie directed by John Cameron Mitchell about the fictional character created by John Galliano.

She starred in a series of short films that were situated in different cities to promote the "Lady Dior" handbags: "Lady Noire Affair" (in Paris) directed by Olivier Dahan, "Lady Blue Shanghai" directed by David Lynch, "Lady Rouge" (in New York City) directed by Jonas Akerlund and "Lady Grey London" directed by John Cameron Mitchell and starring Ian McKellen and Russell Tovey.

This campaign has also resulted in a musical collaboration with Scottish rock band Franz Ferdinand, where Cotillard has provided the vocals for a composition performed by the group, entitled "The Eyes of Mars", for the "Lady Rouge" campaign.

In 2012, she starred in the web-series "Lady Dior Web Documentary" and wrote and performed the song "Lily's body" for one episode, she also designed her own handbag for Dior, the "360° bag". Cotillard also appeared on the cover of the first issue of "Dior Magazine" in September 2012.

In 2014, she wrote and co-directed alongside Eliott Bliss, a music video for her song "Snapshot in LA", especially for Lady Dior's campaign "Enter The Game – Dior Cuise 2015".

In the late 90s, Cotillard was in a relationship with French actor Julien Rassam. She had a long-term relationship with French actor Stéphan Guérin-Tillié from 2000 to 2005. They co-starred in the short films "Quelques jours de trop" (2000) and "Heureuse" (2001), in the 2001 TV series "Les redoutables", and in the 2005 feature films "Cavalcade" and "Edy". She dated French singer Sinclair from 2005 to 2007.

Since October 2007, Cotillard has been in a relationship with French actor and director Guillaume Canet. They had been friends since 1997, and co-starred together for the first time years later in the 2003 film "Love Me If You Dare". Despite common misconception, the couple are not married. Though since 2010 Cotillard has been spotted wearing a diamond solitaire on her left hand – a present from Canet – they are not engaged either. In 2014, Cotillard denied being married to Canet, instead referring to him as "my boyfriend" in interviews. In 2011 they had their first child, a son, and in 2017 their second child, a daughter was born.

In addition to her film work, Cotillard is active in philanthropy, environmental activism, and has participated in campaigns for environmental protection, in particular Greenpeace, for whom she has been a member and acted as a spokesperson since 2001. She is also a member of WWF and the Nicolas Hulot Foundation, which supports environmental initiatives in France and abroad to engage the ecological transition of our societies.

In 2005, she contributed to "Dessins pour le climat" ("Drawings for the Climate"), a book of drawings published by Greenpeace to raise funds for the group, and in 2010, she travelled to Congo with Greenpeace to visit tropical rainforests threatened by logging companies, it was shown in the documentary "The Congolese Rainforests: Living on Borrowed Time".

In 2009, Cotillard was one of many celebrities to record a cover version of the song "Beds are Burning" by Midnight Oil, in support of TckTckTck and climate justice. In the same year, Cotillard designed her own doll for UNICEF France campaign ""Les Frimousses Font Leur Cinéma"", that was sold to help vaccinate thousands of children in Darfur.

In 2011, she publicly supported Chief Raoni in his fight against the Belo Monte Dam in Brazil and signed his petition.

Cotillard is the patron of Maud Fontenoy Foundation, a non-governmental organization which is dedicated to teaching children about preserving the oceans. She is also the ambassador of , a French association that supports indigenous peoples for their rights and the preservation of their cultures and the Amazon Forest they inhabit.

In 2012, Cotillard was featured on Kate Winslet's book ""The Golden Hat: Talking Back To Autism"", with celebrity self-portraits to raise awareness and support for autism launched by Winslet's Golden Hat Foundation.

In 2013, she caged herself near Paris's Louvre museum to demand the freeing of 30 Greenpeace activists jailed in Russia over an Arctic protest. She entered the cage and held a banner proclaiming "I am a climate defender".

Cotillard also supports The Heart Fund, an international public charity that is a pioneer in technological innovation to combat cardiovascular diseases in children.

In February 2014, she signed ""The Tiger Manifesto"", a campaign calling for an end to everyday products being manufactured through forest destruction. Launched by Greenpeace, the campaign is encouraging consumers to demand products are forest and tiger-friendly, particularly in Indonesia, where the Sumatran tiger is on brink of extinction.

On 21 May 2014, Greenpeace released the animated video ""The Amazon's Silent Crisis"", narrated by Cotillard. The video highlights the troubling illegal logging that threatens the Brazilian Amazon.

On 26 February 2015, she went to the Philippines along France's President François Hollande and actress Mélanie Laurent, to participate on a forum and encourage faster and more determined action on the global challenge of climate change.

At the 2015 Cannes Film Festival, director Mark Osborne revealed that Cotillard used to visit Children's Hospitals and play The Rose (from the book The Little Prince) for the kids, years before she voiced the character in the 2015 film "The Little Prince", directed by Osborne.

Cotillard was the ambassador of ""1 Heart 1 Tree"", an art project that fights climate change through its "Plant for the Planet" reforestation program. On 29 November 2015, The Eiffel Tower became a virtual forest with trees and words encouraging environmental activism projected onto it every evening. Cotillard and UN Secretary General Ban Ki-Moon, inaugurated the light installation on the eve of the official opening of the COP21 conference. She also donated her shoes to be displayed among an installation of over 10,000 shoes at the Place de la Republique in Paris. The installation replaced a giant march for climate change which was forbidden by French authorities following the deadly attacks in the capital on 13 November, which cost 130 lives. It was a way of showing the determination of protesters in their fight against climate change, and allowed them to still send a strong message on the eve of the U.N. climate conference (COP21).

On 10 December 2015, Cotillard voiced the French version of the short film "Home", made by Conservation International (CI). The short film debuted at the United Nations Momentum for Change Awards ceremony at the climate negotiations (COP21) in Paris. It was the latest addition to CI's award-winning "Nature Is Speaking" short film series. "Home" was produced to remind negotiators and world leaders at the climate talks of our common duty – how to care for the Earth that cares for us all. ""This Earth is our shared home, our only home. The time to safeguard its future – and with it our own future – is right now,"" said Cotillard.

As of 2018, Cotillard has appeared on more than 300 magazine covers around the world, such as "Vogue", "Elle", "Marie Claire", "Variety", "Harper's Bazaar", "Vanity Fair", "Madame Figaro", "Glamour", "W", "Porter", "The Hollywood Reporter" and "Wall Street Journal Magazine". In August 2012, Cotillard was featured in three major magazine covers: the American Vogue, Vogue Paris and Marie Claire UK. She was also featured on the cover of the first issue of Dior Magazine in September 2012.

Cotillard was named "The Most Beautiful Face of 2013" by The Independent Critics List of the 100 Most Beautiful Famous Faces From Around the World, and ranked as one of the most "Beautiful Famous Faces" for 16 consecutive years. She was ranked No. 47 in 2017, No. 36 in 2016, No. 18 in 2015, No. 14 in 2014, No. 1 in 2013, No. 2 in 2012, No. 7 in 2011, No. 12 in 2010, No. 15 in 2009, No. 4 in 2008, No. 3 in 2007, No. 8 in 2006, No. 17 in 2005, No. 35 in 2004, No. 20 in 2003, and No. 31 in 2002.

Was the first actress on a Vogue Paris September cover in five years with her September 2010 cover.

Named "Woman of the Decade" by Vogue Paris on their list of the "40 Women of The Decade" in 2010.

In 2012, Cotillard was named "The World's Sexiest Woman" by the Hungarian magazine Periodika.

In 2013, she was ranked No. 13 on Empire Online's list of the "100 Sexiest Movie Stars", was No. 12 on French magazine Slate's list of the "100 Most Influential Women of France", No. 68 on Total Film's list of "Top 200 Performances of All Time" for her performance in "La Vie en Rose", and named "Best Dressed Star of 2013" by the British Grazia magazine.

In 2014, she was described as "the great silent film actress of our time" by British film critic Robbie Collin from The Daily Telegraph, for her ability to show emotions only with her eyes and facial expressions, although she has never appeared in a silent film, and was named "The Most Bankable French Actress of the 21st Century", her films accumulating more than 37 million ticket sales in France from 2001 to 2014.

Ranked No. 18 on British GQ Magazine's list of "The World's 20 Coolest Women" in 2014.

Chosen as one of the 'Best Film Femme Fatales' by Harper's Bazaar in 2014, for her performance as Mal in "Inception".

In April 2016, Vox.com analysed the actresses who have starred in the best reviewed films ranked by average Metacritic rating, and Cotillard was No. 3 with an average score of 68.

Ranked No. 2 on Google's "Most Searched Actresses of 2016".

Cotillard was featured on the official poster of the 42nd César Awards in 2017.

Has a look-alike puppet in the French TV show "Les Guignols de l'info" since 2013.

Was mentioned on Jodie Foster's Golden Globe speech in 2013. Foster said: "[...] "But now I'm told, apparently, that every celebrity is expected to honor the details of their private life with a press conference, a fragrance and a prime-time reality show. You know, you guys might be surprised, but I am not Honey Boo Boo Child. No, I'm sorry, that's just not me. It never was and it never will be. Please don't cry because my reality show would be so boring. I would have to make out with Marion Cotillard or I'd have to spank Daniel Craig's bottom just to stay on the air. It's not bad work if you can get it, though."".

A sample of Cotillard and Leonardo DiCaprio's dialogue in the train scene from "Inception" ("You're waiting for a train..."), is featured on the song "Far Away" by nExow at minute 03:28.

In 2014, Brazilian brand Chara Rial named a Mocassin shoes after her.

In April 2015, the French rap band Columbine released a song titled "Marion". During the chorus, they sing "Je t'aime, t'es belle comme Marion Cotillard" ("I love you, you're as pretty as Marion Cotillard", in French).

Cecily Strong has impersonated Cotillard four times on "Saturday Night Live", on the episodes aired on April 11, 2015, October 1, 2016, May 13, 2017 and October 10, 2017, respectively.

As of 2018, Cotillard's films have grossed more than $3 billion at the worldwide box-office.

Cotillard has dubbed several films and documentaries in France and in the U.S., and also dubbed in French all of her roles in English-language films.
Among other awards, Cotillard has received an Academy Award for Best Actress, a Golden Globe Award, a BAFTA Award, two César Awards, a Lumières Award and a European Film Award. She has also won a New York Film Critics Circle Award, a National Society of Film Critics Award, and a Los Angeles Film Critics Association Award for Best Actress, the critics' awards trifecta. Cotillard and Isabelle Adjani are the only French actresses to win the New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Actress. Adjani won in 1975 for "The Story of Adele H." (1975), while Cotillard was awarded for her performances in "The Immigrant" (2013) and "Two Days, One Night" (2014) in 2014.

In March 2010, Cotillard was made a Chevalier (Knight) of the Ordre des Arts et des Lettres (Order of the Arts and Letters) by the French government for her "contribution to the enrichment of French culture". She was promoted to Officer on 10 February 2016.

On 14 July 2016, Cotillard received France's highest honour – she was named a Chevalier (Knight) of the Légion d'Honneur (Legion of Honor). The actress was among 650 names from the worlds of politics, culture, sport and public life published in the government's official journal for Bastille Day.




</doc>
<doc id="42357" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42357" title="Elizabeth Taylor">
Elizabeth Taylor

Dame Elizabeth Rosemond "Liz" Taylor, (27 February 1932 – 23 March 2011) was a British-American actress, businesswoman, and humanitarian. She began her career as a child actress in the early 1940s, and was one of the most popular stars of classical Hollywood cinema in the 1950s. She continued her career successfully into the 1960s, and remained a well-known public figure for the rest of her life. In 1999, the American Film Institute named her the seventh-greatest female screen legend.

Born in London to wealthy, socially prominent American parents, Taylor moved with her family to Los Angeles in 1939, and she soon was given a film contract by Universal Pictures. She made her screen debut in a minor role in "There's One Born Every Minute" (1942), but Universal terminated her contract after a year. Taylor was then signed by Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer, and had her breakthrough role in "National Velvet" (1944), becoming one of the studio's most popular teenaged stars. She made the transition to adult roles in the early 1950s, when she starred in the comedy "Father of the Bride" (1950) and received critical acclaim for her performance in the drama "A Place in the Sun" (1951).

Despite being one of MGM's most bankable stars, Taylor wished to end her career in the early 1950s, as she resented the studio's control and disliked many of the films to which she was assigned. She began receiving roles she enjoyed more in the mid-1950s, beginning with the epic drama "Giant" (1956), and starred in several critically and commercially successful films in the following years. These included two film adaptations of plays by Tennessee Williams: "Cat on a Hot Tin Roof" (1958), and "Suddenly, Last Summer" (1959); Taylor won a Golden Globe for Best Actress for the latter. Although she disliked her role as a call girl in "BUtterfield 8" (1960), her last film for MGM, she won the Academy Award for Best Actress for her performance.

Taylor was then paid a record-breaking $1 million to play the title role in the historical epic "Cleopatra" (1963), the most expensive film made up to that point. During the filming, Taylor and co-star Richard Burton began an extramarital affair, which caused a scandal. Despite public disapproval, Burton and she continued their relationship, and were married in 1964. Dubbed "Liz and Dick" by the media, they starred in 11 films together, including "The V.I.P.s" (1963), "The Sandpiper" (1965), "The Taming of the Shrew" (1967), and "Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf?" (1966). Taylor received the best reviews of her career for "Woolf", winning her second Academy Award and several other awards for her performance. She and Burton divorced in 1974, but reconciled soon after, and re-married in 1975. The second marriage ended in divorce in 1976.

Taylor's acting career began to decline in the late 1960s, although she continued starring in films until the mid-1970s, after which she focused on supporting the career of her sixth husband, Senator John Warner. In the 1980s, she acted in her first substantial stage roles and in several television films and series, and became the first celebrity to launch a perfume brand. Taylor was also one of the first celebrities to take part in HIV/AIDS activism. She co-founded the American Foundation for AIDS Research in 1985, and the Elizabeth Taylor AIDS Foundation in 1991. From the early 1990s until her death, she dedicated her time to philanthropy. She received several accolades for it, including the Presidential Citizens Medal.

Throughout her life, Taylor's personal affairs were subject to constant media attention. She was married eight times to seven men, endured serious illnesses, and led a jet set lifestyle, including assembling one of the most expensive private collections of jewelry. After many years of ill health, Taylor died from congestive heart failure at the age of 79 in 2011.

Elizabeth Rosemond Taylor was born on February 27, 1932, at Heathwood, her family's home on 8 Wildwood Road in Hampstead Garden Suburb, London. She received dual British-American citizenship at birth, as her parents, art dealer Francis Lenn Taylor (1897–1968) and retired stage actress Sara Sothern (née Sara Viola Warmbrodt, 1895–1994), were United States citizens, both originally from Arkansas City, Kansas. They moved to London in 1929, and opened an art gallery on Bond Street; their first child, a son named Howard, was born the same year.

The family led a privileged life in London during Taylor's childhood. Their social circle included artists such as Augustus John and Laura Knight, and politicians such as Colonel Victor Cazalet. Cazalet was Taylor's unofficial godfather, and an important influence in her early life. She was enrolled in Byron House, a Montessori school in Highgate, and was raised according to the teachings of Christian Science, the religion of her mother and Cazalet.

The Taylors decided to return to the United States in the spring of 1939 due to the increasingly tense political situation in Europe. American ambassador Joseph P. Kennedy also contacted Francis, and encouraged him to return to the U.S. with his family. Sara and the children left first in April 1939, and moved in with Taylor's maternal grandfather in Pasadena, California. Francis stayed behind to close the London gallery, and joined them in December. In early 1940, he opened a new gallery in Los Angeles, and after briefly living in Pacific Palisades, the family settled in Beverly Hills, where Taylor and her brother were enrolled in Hawthorne School.

In California, Taylor's mother was frequently told that her daughter should audition for films. Taylor's eyes in particular drew attention; they were blue to the extent of appearing violet, and were rimmed by dark double eyelashes, caused by a genetic mutation. Sara was initially opposed to Taylor appearing in films, but after the outbreak of war in Europe made return there unlikely, she began to view the film industry as a way of assimilating to American society. Francis Taylor's Beverly Hills gallery had gained clients from the film industry soon after opening, helped by the endorsement of gossip columnist Hedda Hopper, a friend of the Cazalets. Through a client and a school friend's father, Taylor auditioned for both Universal Pictures and Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer early 1941. Both studios offered Taylor contracts, and Sara Taylor chose to accept Universal's offer.

Taylor began her contract in April 1941, and was cast in a small role in "There's One Born Every Minute" (1942). She did not receive other roles, and her contract was terminated after a year. Universal's casting director explained her dislike of Taylor, stating that "the kid has nothing ... her eyes are too old, she doesn't have the face of a child". Biographer Alexander Walker agrees that Taylor looked different from the child stars of the era, such as Shirley Temple and Judy Garland, and she herself later explained that, "apparently, I used to frighten grown ups, because I was totally direct".

Taylor received another opportunity in late 1942, when her father's acquaintance, MGM producer Samuel Marx, arranged her to audition for a minor role requiring an actress with an English accent in "Lassie Come Home" (1943). After a trial contract of three months, she was given a standard seven-year contract in January 1943. Following "Lassie", she appeared in minor uncredited roles in two other films set in England - "Jane Eyre" (1943), and "The White Cliffs of Dover" (1944).

"National Velvet" became a box-office success upon its release on Christmas 1944. Bosley Crowther of "The New York Times" stated that "her whole manner in this picture is one of refreshing grace", while James Agee of "The Nation" wrote that she "is rapturously beautiful... I hardly know or care whether she can act or not."

Taylor later stated that her childhood ended when she became a star, as MGM started to control every aspect of her life. She described the studio as a "big extended factory" where she was required to adhere to a strict daily schedule: Days were spent attending school and filming at the studio lot, and evenings in dancing and singing classes and in practising the following day's scenes. Following the success of "National Velvet", MGM gave Taylor a new seven-year contract with a weekly salary of $750, and cast her in a minor role in the third film of the Lassie series, "Courage of Lassie" (1946). The studio also published a book of Taylor's writings about her pet chipmunk, "Nibbles and Me" (1946), and had paper dolls and coloring books made after her.

They were followed by supporting roles as a teenaged "man-stealer" who seduces her peer's date to a high school dance in the musical "A Date with Judy" (1948), and as a bride in the romantic comedy "Julia Misbehaves" (1948), which became a commercial success by grossing over $4 million in the box office. Taylor's last adolescent role was as Amy March in Mervyn LeRoy's "Little Women" (1949). While it did not match the popularity of the previous 1933 film adaptation of Louisa M. Alcott's novel, it was a box-office success. The same year, "Time" featured Taylor on its cover, and called her the leader among Hollywood's next generation of stars, "a jewel of great price, a true sapphire".

Taylor made the transition to adult roles in 1950, the year she turned 18. Her first mature role was playing a woman who begins to suspect that her husband is a Soviet spy in the thriller "Conspirator" (1949). Taylor had been only 16 at the time of its filming, but its release was delayed until March 1950, as MGM disliked it and feared it could cause diplomatic problems. Taylor's second film of 1950 was the comedy "The Big Hangover" (1950), co-starring Van Johnson. It was released in May, and the same month, Taylor married hotel-chain heir Conrad Hilton, Jr., in a highly publicized ceremony. The event was organized by MGM, and used as part of the publicity campaign for Taylor's next film, Vincente Minnelli's comedy "Father of the Bride" (1950), in which she appeared opposite Spencer Tracy and Joan Bennett as a bride preparing for her wedding. The film became a box-office success upon its release in June, grossing $6 million worldwide, and was followed by a successful sequel, "Father's Little Dividend" (1951), ten months later.

Taylor's next film release, George Stevens' "A Place in the Sun" (1951), marked a departure from her earlier films. According to Taylor, it was the first film in which she had been asked to act, instead of simply being herself, and it brought her critical acclaim for the first time since "National Velvet". Based on Theodore Dreiser's novel "An American Tragedy" (1925), it featured Taylor as a spoiled socialite who comes between a poor factory worker (Montgomery Clift) and his pregnant girlfriend (Shelley Winters). Stevens cast Taylor as she was "the only one ... who could create this illusion" of being "not so much a real girl as the girl on the candy-box cover, the beautiful girl in the yellow Cadillac convertible that every American boy sometime or other thinks he can marry".

"A Place in the Sun" was a critical and commercial success, grossing $3 million. Herb Golden of "Variety" stated that Taylor's "histrionics are of a quality so far beyond anything she has done previously, that Stevens' skilled hands on the reins must be credited with a minor miracle", and A.H. Weiler of "The New York Times" wrote that she gives "a shaded, tender performance, and one in which her passionate and genuine romance avoids the pathos common to young love as it sometimes comes to the screen".

Taylor next starred in the romantic comedy "Love Is Better Than Ever" (1952). According to Alexander Walker, MGM cast her in the "B-picture" as a reprimand for divorcing Hilton in January 1951 after only nine months of marriage, which had caused a public scandal that reflected negatively on her. After completing "Love Is Better Than Ever", Taylor was sent to Britain to take part in the historical epic "Ivanhoe" (1952), which was one of the most expensive projects in the studio's history. She was not happy about the project, finding the story superficial and her role as Rebecca too small. Regardless, "Ivanhoe" became one of MGM's biggest commercial successes, earning $11 million in worldwide rentals.

Taylor's last film made under her old contract with MGM was "The Girl Who Had Everything" (1953), a remake of the pre-code drama "A Free Soul" (1931). Despite her grievances with the studio, she signed a new seven-year contract with MGM in the summer of 1952. Although she wanted more interesting roles, the decisive factor in continuing with the studio was her financial need; she had recently married British actor Michael Wilding, and was pregnant with her first child. In addition to granting her a weekly salary of $4,700, MGM agreed to give the couple a loan for a house, and signed Wilding for a three-year contract. Due to her financial dependency, the studio now had even more control over her than previously.

Taylor's first two films made under her new contract were released ten days apart in spring 1954. The first was "Rhapsody", a romantic film starring her as a woman caught in a love triangle with two musicians. The second was "Elephant Walk", a drama in which she played a British woman struggling to adapt to life on her husband's tea plantation in Ceylon. She had been loaned to Paramount Pictures for the film after its original star, Vivien Leigh, fell ill.

In the fall, Taylor starred in two more film releases. "Beau Brummell" was a Regency era period film, another project in which she was cast against her will. Taylor disliked historical films in general, as their elaborate costumes and make-up required her to wake up earlier than usual to prepare, and later stated that she gave one of the worst performances of her career in "Beau Brummell". The second film was Richard Brooks' "The Last Time I Saw Paris", based on F. Scott Fitzgerald's short story. Although she had instead wanted to be cast in "The Barefoot Contessa" (1954), Taylor liked the film, and later stated that it "convinced me I wanted to be an actress instead of yawning my way through parts". While "The Last Time I Saw Paris" was not as profitable as many other MGM films, it garnered positive reviews. Taylor became pregnant again during the production, and had to agree to add another year to her contract to make up for the period spent on maternity leave.

 By the mid-1950s, the American film industry was beginning to face serious competition from television, which resulted in studios producing fewer films, and focusing instead on their quality. The change benefited Taylor, who finally found interesting roles after several years of career disappointments. After lobbying director George Stevens, she won the female lead role in "Giant" (1956), an epic drama about a ranching dynasty, which co-starred Rock Hudson and James Dean. Its filming in Marfa, Texas, was a difficult experience for Taylor, as she clashed with Stevens, who wanted to break her will to make her easier to direct, and was often ill, resulting in delays. To further complicate the production, Dean died in a car accident only days after completing filming; grieving Taylor still had to film reaction shots to their joint scenes. When "Giant" was released a year later, it became a box-office success, and was widely praised by critics. Although not nominated for an Academy Award like her co-stars, Taylor's performance also garnered positive reviews, with "Variety" calling it "surprisingly clever", and "The Manchester Guardian" lauded it as "an astonishing revelation of unsuspected gifts", and named her one of the film's strongest assets.

MGM next re-united Taylor with Montgomery Clift in "Raintree County" (1957), a Civil War drama it hoped would replicate the success of "Gone with the Wind" (1939). Taylor found her role as a mentally disturbed Southern belle fascinating, but overall disliked the film. Although the film failed to become the type of success MGM had planned, Taylor was nominated for the first time for an Academy Award for Best Actress for her performance.
Taylor considered her next performance as Maggie the Cat in the screen adaptation of the Tennessee Williams play "Cat on a Hot Tin Roof" (1958) a career "high point", although it coincided with one of the most difficult periods in her personal life. After completing "Raintree Country", she had divorced Wilding and married producer Mike Todd. She had completed only two weeks of filming in March 1958, when Todd was killed in a plane crash. Although she was devastated, pressure from the studio and the knowledge that Todd had large debts led Taylor to return to work only three weeks later. She later stated that she "in a way ... became Maggie", and that acting "was the only time I could function" in the weeks after Todd's death.

During the production, Taylor's personal life drew further public attention when she began an affair with singer Eddie Fisher, whose marriage to actress Debbie Reynolds had been idealized by the media as the union of "America's sweethearts". The affair - and Fisher's subsequent divorce - changed Taylor's public image from a grieving widow to a "homewrecker". MGM used the scandal to its advantage by featuring an image of Taylor posing on a bed in a négligée in the film's promotional posters. "Cat" grossed $10 million in American cinemas alone, and made Taylor the year's second-most profitable star. She received positive reviews for her performance, with Bosley Crowther of "The New York Times" calling her "terrific", and "Variety" praising her for "a well-accented, perceptive interpretation". Taylor was nominated for an Academy Award and a BAFTA.
Taylor's next film, Joseph L. Mankiewicz' "Suddenly, Last Summer" (1959), was another Tennessee Williams adaptation, and co-starred Montgomery Clift and Katharine Hepburn. The independent production earned Taylor $500,000 for playing the role of a severely traumatized patient in a mental institution. Although the film was a drama about mental illness, childhood traumas, and homosexuality, it was again promoted with Taylor's sex appeal; both its trailer and poster featured her in a white swimsuit. The strategy worked, as the film became a financial success. Taylor received her third Academy Award nomination and her first Golden Globe for Best Actress for her performance.

By 1959, Taylor owed one more film for MGM, which it decided should be "BUtterfield 8" (1960), a drama about a high-class prostitute. The studio correctly calculated that Taylor's public image would make it easy for audiences to associate her with the role. She hated the film for the same reason, but had no choice in the matter, although the studio agreed to her demands of filming in New York and casting Eddie Fisher in a sympathetic role. As predicted, "BUtterfield 8" was a major commercial success, grossing $18 million in world rentals. Crowther wrote that Taylor "looks like a million dollars, in mink or in negligée", while "Variety" stated that she gives "a torrid, stinging portrayal with one or two brilliantly executed passages within". Taylor won her first Academy Award for Best Actress for her performance.

After completing her MGM contract, Taylor starred in 20th Century-Fox's "Cleopatra" (1963) - a historical epic which, according to film historian Alexander Doty, made her more famous than ever before. She became the first actress to be paid $1 million for a role; Fox also granted her 10% of the film's profits, as well as shooting the film in Todd-AO, a widescreen format for which she had inherited the rights from Mike Todd. The film's production -
characterized by costly sets and costumes, constant delays, and a scandal caused by Taylor's extramarital affair with her co-star Richard Burton - was closely followed by the media, with "Life" proclaiming it the "Most Talked About Movie Ever Made". Filming first began in England in 1960, but had to be halted several times due to bad weather and Taylor's ill health. In March 1961, she developed nearly fatal pneumonia, which necessitated a tracheotomy; one news agency even erroneously reported that she had died. Once she had recovered, Fox discarded the already filmed material, and moved the production to Rome, changing its director to Joseph Mankiewicz, and the actor playing Mark Antony to Burton. Filming was finally completed in July 1962. The film's final cost was $62 million, making it the most expensive film made up to that point.

"Cleopatra" became the biggest box-office success of 1963 in the United States, grossing $15.7 million. Regardless, it took several years for the film to earn back its production costs, which drove Fox near to bankruptcy. The studio, which publicly blamed Taylor for the production's troubles, unsuccessfully sued Burton and her for allegedly damaging the film with their behavior. The film's reviews were mixed to negative, with critics finding Taylor overweight and her voice too thin, and unfavorably comparing her with her classically trained British co-stars. In retrospect, Taylor called "Cleopatra" a "low point" in her career, and stated that the studio cut out the scenes which provided the "core of the characterization".

Taylor intended on following "Cleopatra" by headlining an all-star cast in Fox's black comedy "What a Way to Go!" (1964), but negotiations fell through, and Shirley MacLaine was cast, instead. In the meantime, film producers were eager to profit from the scandal surrounding Taylor and Burton, and they next starred together in Anthony Asquith's "The V.I.P.s" (1963), which mirrored the headlines about them. Taylor played a famous model attempting to leave her husband for a lover, and Burton her estranged millionaire husband. Released soon after "Cleopatra", it became a box-office success. Taylor was also paid $500,000 to appear in a CBS television special, "Elizabeth Taylor in London", in which she visited the city's landmarks and recited passages from the works of famous British writers.

After completing "The V.I.P.s", Taylor took a two-year hiatus from films, during which Burton and she divorced their spouses and married each other. The supercouple continued starring together in films in the mid-1960s, earning a combined $88 million over the next decade; Burton once stated, "They say we generate more business activity than one of the smaller African 
nations." Alexander Walker compared these films to "illustrated gossip columns", as their film roles often reflected their public personae, while Doty has noted that the majority of Taylor's films during this period seemed to "conform to, and reinforce, the image of an indulgent, raucous, immoral or amoral, and appetitive (in many senses of the word) 'Elizabeth Taylor. Taylor and Burton's first joint project following her hiatus was Vincente Minelli's romantic drama "The Sandpiper" (1965), about an illicit love affair between a bohemian artist and a married clergyman in the Big Sur. Its reviews were largely negative, but it grossed a successful $14 million in the box office.

Their next project, "Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf?" (1966), featured the most critically acclaimed performance of Taylor's career. She and Burton starred as Martha and George, a middle-aged couple going through a marital crisis. To convincingly play 50-year-old Martha, Taylor gained weight, wore a wig, and used make-up to make herself look old and tired - in stark contrast to her public image as a glamorous film star. At Taylor's suggestion, theater director Mike Nichols was hired to direct the project, despite his lack of experience with film. The production differed from anything she had done previously, as Nichols wanted to thoroughly rehearse the play before beginning filming. "Woolf" was considered ground-breaking for its adult themes and uncensored language, and opened to "glorious" reviews. "Variety" wrote that Taylor's "characterization is at once sensual, spiteful, cynical, pitiable, loathsome, lustful, and tender", and Stanley Kauffmann of "The New York Times" stated that she "does the best work of her career, sustained and urgent". The film also became one of the biggest commercial successes of the year. Taylor received her second Academy Award, a BAFTA, a National Board of Review, and a New York City Film Critics Circle awards for her performance.

In 1966, Taylor and Burton also performed "Doctor Faustus" for a week in Oxford to benefit the Oxford University Dramatic Society; he starred and she appeared in her first stage role as Helen of Troy, a part which required no speaking. Although it received generally negative reviews, Burton produced it into a film, "Doctor Faustus" (1967), with the same cast. It was also panned by critics and grossed only $600,000 in the box office. Taylor and Burton's next project, Franco Zeffirelli's "The Taming of the Shrew" (1967), which they also co-produced, was more successful. It posed another challenge for Taylor, as she was the only actor in the project with no previous experience of performing Shakespeare; Zeffirelli later stated that this made her performance interesting, as she "invented the part from scratch". Critics found the play to be fitting material for the couple, and the film became a box-office success by grossing $12 million.

Taylor's third film released in 1967, John Huston's "Reflections in a Golden Eye", was her first without Burton since "Cleopatra". It was a drama about a repressed homosexual and his unfaithful wife, and was originally slated to co-star Taylor's old friend Montgomery Clift. His career had been in decline for several years due to his substance-abuse problems, but Taylor was determined to secure his involvement in the project, even offering to pay for his insurance. However, Clift died from a heart attack before filming began; he was replaced by Marlon Brando. "Reflections" was a critical and commercial failure at the time of its release. Taylor and Burton's last film of the year was the Graham Greene adaptation "The Comedians", which received mixed reviews and was a box-office disappointment.

By the late 1960s, Taylor's career was in decline. She had gained weight, was nearing middle age, and did not fit in with New Hollywood stars such as Jane Fonda and Julie Christie. After several years of nearly constant media attention, the public was also tiring of Burton and her and criticized their jet set lifestyle.
In 1968, Taylor starred in two films directed by Joseph Losey - "Boom!", and "Secret Ceremony" - both of which were critical and commercial failures. The former, based on Tennessee Williams' "The Milk Train Doesn't Stop Here Anymore", features her as an aging, serial-marrying millionaire, and Burton as a younger man who turns up on the Mediterranean island on which she has retired. "Secret Ceremony" is a psychological drama which also stars Mia Farrow and Robert Mitchum. Taylor's third film with George Stevens, "The Only Game in Town" (1970), in which she played a Las Vegas showgirl who has an affair with a compulsive gambler, played by Warren Beatty, was unsuccessful.

The three films in which Taylor acted in 1972 were somewhat more successful. "Zee and Co.", which portrayed Michael Caine and her as a troubled married couple, won her the David di Donatello for Best Foreign Actress. She then appeared with Burton in the Dylan Thomas adaptation "Under Milk Wood"; although her role was small, its producers decided to give her top-billing to profit from her fame. Her third film role that year was playing a blonde diner waitress in Peter Ustinov's "Faust" parody "Hammersmith Is Out", her tenth collaboration with Burton. Although it was overall not successful, Taylor received some good reviews, with Vincent Canby of "The New York Times" writing that she has "a certain vulgar, ratty charm", and Roger Ebert of the "Chicago Sun-Times" stating, "The spectacle of Elizabeth Taylor growing older and more beautiful continues to amaze the population". Her performance won the Silver Bear for Best Actress at the Berlin Film Festival.

Taylor and Burton's last film together was the Harlech Television film "Divorce His, Divorce Hers" (1973), fittingly named as they divorced the following year. Her other films released in 1973 were the British thriller "Night Watch" (1973) and the American drama "Ash Wednesday" (1973). For the latter, in which she starred as a woman who undergoes multiple plastic surgeries in an attempt to save her marriage, she received a Golden Globe nomination. Her only film released in 1974, the Italian Muriel Spark adaptation "The Driver's Seat" (1974), was a failure.

Taylor took fewer roles after the mid-1970s, and focused on supporting the career of her sixth husband, Republican politician John Warner. In 1976, she participated in the Soviet-American fantasy film "The Blue Bird" (1976), a critical and box-office failure, and had a small role in the television film "Victory at Entebbe" (1976), and in 1977, she sang in the critically panned film adaptation of Stephen Sondheim's "A Little Night Music" (1977).

After a period of semi-retirement from films, Taylor starred in "The Mirror Crack'd" (1980), adapted from an Agatha Christie mystery novel and featuring an ensemble cast of actors from the studio era, such as Angela Lansbury, Kim Novak, Rock Hudson, and Tony Curtis. Wanting to challenge herself, she then appeared in her first substantial stage role, playing Regina Giddens in a Broadway production of Lillian Hellman's "The Little Foxes". Instead of portraying Giddens in negative light as had often been the case in previous productions, Taylor's idea was to show her as a victim of circumstance, explaining, "She's a killer, but she's saying, 'Sorry fellas, you put me in this position'". The production premiered in May 1981, and had a sold-out six-month run despite mixed reviews. Frank Rich of "The New York Times" wrote that Taylor's performance as "Regina Giddens, that malignant Southern bitch-goddess ... begins gingerly, soon gathers steam, and then explodes into a black and thunderous storm that may just knock you out of your seat", while Dan Sullivan of the "Los Angeles Times" stated, "Taylor presents a possible Regina Giddens, as seen through the persona of Elizabeth Taylor. There's some acting in it, as well as some personal display." She appeared as evil socialite Helena Cassadine in the day-time soap opera "General Hospital" in November 1981. The following spring, she continued performing "The Little Foxes" in London's West End, but received largely negative reviews from the British press.

Encouraged by the success of "The Little Foxes", Taylor and producer Zev Buffman founded the Elizabeth Taylor Repertory Company. Its first and only production was a revival of Noël Coward's comedy "Private Lives", starring Taylor and Burton. It premiered in Boston in spring 1983, and although commercially successful, received generally negative reviews, with critics noting that both stars were in noticeably poor health - Taylor admitted herself to a drug and alcohol rehabilitation center after the play's run ended, and Burton died the following year. After the failure of "Private Lives", Taylor dissolved her theater company.
Her only other project that year was television film "Between Friends".

From the mid-1980s, Taylor acted mostly in television productions. She made cameos in the soap operas "Hotel" and "All My Children" in 1984, and played a brothel keeper in the historical mini-series "North and South" in 1985. She also starred in several television films, playing gossip columnist Louella Parsons in "Malice in Wonderland" (1985), a "fading movie star" in the drama "There Must Be a Pony" (1986), and a character based on Poker Alice in the eponymous Western (1987). She re-united with director Franco Zeffirelli to appear in his French-Italian biopic "Young Toscanini" (1988), and had the last starring role of her career in a television adaptation of "Sweet Bird of Youth" (1989), her fourth Tennessee Williams play. During this time, she also began receiving honorary awards for her career - the Cecil B. DeMille Award in 1985, and the Film Society of Lincoln Center's Chaplin Award in 1986.

In the 1990s, Taylor focused her time on HIV/AIDS activism. Her few acting roles included characters in the animated series "Captain Planet and the Planeteers" (1992) and "The Simpsons" (1992, 1993), and cameos in four CBS series - "The Nanny", "Can't Hurry Love", "Murphy Brown", and "High Society" - in one night in February 1996 to promote her new fragrance. Her last theatrically released film was in the critically panned, but commercially very successful, "The Flintstones" (1994), in which she played Pearl Slaghoople in a brief supporting role. Taylor received American and British honors for her career: the AFI Life Achievement Award in 1993, the Screen Actors Guild honorary award in 1997, and a BAFTA Fellowship in 1999. In 2000, she was made a Dame by Queen Elizabeth II. After supporting roles in the television film "These Old Broads" (2001) and in the animated sitcom "God, the Devil and Bob" (2001), Taylor announced that she was retiring from acting to devote her time to philanthropy. She gave one last public performance in 2007, when James Earl Jones and she performed the play "Love Letters" at an AIDS benefit at the Paramount Studios.

Taylor was one of the first celebrities to participate in HIV/AIDS activism, helping to raise more than $270 million for the cause. She began her philanthropic work in 1984, after becoming frustrated with the disease being widely discussed, but very little being done about it. She later explained for "Vanity Fair" that she "decided that with my name, I could open certain doors, that I was a commodity in myself - and I'm not talking as an actress. I could take the fame I'd resented and tried to get away from for so many years - but you can never get away from it - and use it to do some good. I wanted to retire, but the tabloids wouldn't let me. So, I thought: If you're going to screw me over, I'll use you."
Taylor began her philanthropic efforts by helping to organize and by hosting the first AIDS fund-raiser to benefit the AIDS Project Los Angeles. In August 1985, Dr. Michael Gottlieb and she founded the National AIDS Research Foundation after her friend and former co-star Rock Hudson announced that he was dying of the disease. The following month, the foundation merged with Dr. Mathilde Krim's AIDS foundation to form the American Foundation for AIDS Research (amfAR). As amfAR focuses on funding research, Taylor founded the Elizabeth Taylor AIDS Foundation (ETAF) in 1991 to raise awareness and to provide support services for people with HIV/AIDS, paying for its overhead costs herself. Her trust continues to do so, and 25% of her image and likeness royalties are donated to ETAF. In addition to her work for people affected by HIV/AIDS in the United States, Taylor was instrumental in expanding amfAR's operations to other countries; ETAF also operates internationally.

Taylor testified before the Senate and House for the Ryan White Care Act in 1986, 1990, and 1992. She persuaded President Ronald Reagan to acknowledge the disease for the first time in a speech in 1987, and publicly criticized presidents George H.W. Bush and Bill Clinton for lack of interest in combatting the disease. Taylor also founded the Elizabeth Taylor Medical Center to offer free HIV/AIDS testing and care at the Whitman-Walker Clinic in Washington, D. C., and the Elizabeth Taylor Endowment Fund for the UCLA Clinical AIDS Research and Education Center in Los Angeles. In 2015, Taylor's business partner Kathy Ireland claimed that Taylor ran an illegal "underground network" that distributed medications to Americans suffering from HIV/AIDS during the 1980s, when the Food and Drug Administration had not yet approved them. The claim was challenged by several people, including amfAR's former vice president for development and external affairs, Taylor's former publicist, and activists who were involved in the Project Inform in the 1980s and 1990s.

Taylor was honored with several awards for her philanthropic work. She was made a Knight of the French Legion of Honour in 1987, and received the Jean Hersholt Humanitarian Award in 1993, the Screen Actors' Guild Lifetime Achievement Award for Humanitarian service in 1997, the GLAAD Vanguard Award in 2000, and the Presidential Citizens Medal in 2001.
Taylor was the first celebrity to create her own collection of fragrances. In collaboration with Elizabeth Arden, Inc., she began by launching two best-selling perfumes - Passion in 1987, and White Diamonds in 1991. Taylor personally supervised the creation and production of each of the 11 fragrances marketed in her name. According to biographers Sam Kashner and Nancy Schoenberger, she earned more money through the fragrance collection than during her entire acting career, and upon her death, the British newspaper "The Guardian" estimated that majority of her estimated $600 million-$1 billion estate consisted of revenue from fragrances. In 2005, Taylor also founded a jewelry company, House of Taylor, in collaboration with Kathy Ireland and Jack and Monty Abramov.

Throughout her adult years, Taylor's personal life, and especially her eight marriages, drew a large amount of media attention and public disapproval. According to biographer Alexander Walker, "Whether she liked it or not ... marriage is the matrix of the myth that began surrounding Elizabeth Taylor from [when she was sixteen]". MGM organized her to date football champion Glenn Davis in 1948, and the following year, she was briefly engaged to William Pawley, Jr., son of U.S. ambassador William D. Pawley. Film tycoon Howard Hughes also wanted to marry her, and offered to pay her parents a six-figure sum of money if she were to become his wife. Taylor declined the offer, but was otherwise eager to marry young, as her "rather puritanical upbringing and beliefs" made her believe that "love was synonymous with marriage". Taylor later described herself as being "emotionally immature" during this time due to her sheltered childhood, and believed that she could gain independence from her parents and MGM through marriage.

Taylor was 18 when she married Conrad "Nicky" Hilton, Jr., heir to the Hilton Hotels chain, at the Church of the Good Shepherd in Beverly Hills on May 6, 1950. MGM organized the large and expensive wedding, which became a major media event. In the weeks after their wedding, Taylor realized that she had made a mistake; not only did Hilton and she have few common interests, but he was also abusive and a heavy drinker. She was granted a divorce in January 1951, eight months after their wedding.

Taylor married her second husband, British actor Michael Wilding - a man 20 years her senior - in a low-key ceremony at Caxton Hall in London on February 21, 1952. She had first met him in 1948 while filming "The Conspirator" in England, and their relationship began when she returned to film "Ivanhoe" in 1951. Taylor found their age gap appealing, as she wanted "the calm and quiet and security of friendship" from their relationship; he hoped that the marriage would aid his career in Hollywood. They had two sons: Michael Howard (born January 6, 1953), and Christopher Edward (born February 27, 1955). As Taylor grew older, and more confident in herself, she began to drift apart from Wilding, whose failing career was also a source of marital strife. When she was away filming "Giant" in 1955, gossip magazine "Confidential" caused a scandal by claiming that he had entertained strippers at their home. Taylor and Wilding announced their separation in July 1956, and were divorced in January 1957.
Taylor married her third husband, theater and film producer Mike Todd, in Acapulco, Mexico, on February 2, 1957. They had one daughter, Elizabeth "Liza" Frances (born August 6, 1957). Todd, known for publicity stunts, encouraged the media attention to their marriage; for example, in June 1957, he threw a birthday party at Madison Square Garden, which was attended by 18,000 guests and broadcast on CBS. His death in a plane crash on March 22, 1958, left Taylor devastated. She was comforted by Todd's and her friend, singer Eddie Fisher, with whom she soon began an affair. As Fisher was still married to actress Debbie Reynolds, the affair resulted in a public scandal, with Taylor being branded a "homewrecker". Taylor and Fisher were married at the Temple Beth Sholom in Las Vegas on May 12, 1959; she later stated that she married him only due to her grief.

While filming "Cleopatra" in Italy in 1962, Taylor began an affair with her co-star, Welsh actor Richard Burton, although Burton was also married. Rumors about the affair began to circulate in the press, and were confirmed by a paparazzi shot of them on a yacht in Ischia. According to sociologist Ellis Cashmore, the publication of the photograph was a "turning point", beginning a new era in which it became difficult for celebrities to keep their personal lives separate from their public images. The scandal caused Taylor and Burton to be condemned for "erotic vagrancy" by the Vatican, with calls also in the U.S. Congress to bar them from re-entering the country. Taylor was granted a divorce from Fisher on March 6, 1964, in Puerto Vallarta, Mexico, and married Burton nine days later in a private ceremony at the Ritz-Carlton Montreal. Burton subsequently adopted Liza Todd and Maria Burton (born August 1, 1961), a German orphan whose adoption process Taylor had begun while married to Fisher.
Dubbed "Liz and Dick" by the media, Taylor and Burton starred together in 11 films, and led a jet set lifestyle, spending millions on "furs, diamonds, paintings, designer clothes, travel, food, liquor, a yacht, and a jet". Sociologist Karen Sternheimer states that they "became a cottage industry of speculation about their alleged life of excess. From reports of massive spending [...] affairs, and even an open marriage, the couple came to represent a new era of 'gotcha' celebrity coverage, where the more personal the story, the better." They divorced for the first time in June 1974, but reconciled, and re-married in Kasane, Botswana, on October 10, 1975. The second marriage lasted less than a year, ending in divorce in July 1976. Taylor and Burton's relationship was often referred to as the "marriage of the century" by the media, and she later stated, "After Richard, the men in my life were just there to hold the coat, to open the door. All the men after Richard were really just company."
Soon after her final divorce from Burton, Taylor met her sixth husband, John Warner, a Republican politician from Virginia. They were married on December 4, 1976, after which Taylor concentrated on working for his electoral campaign. Once Warner had been elected to the Senate, she started to find her life as a politician's wife in Washington, D. C., boring and lonely, becoming depressed, overweight, and increasingly addicted to prescription drugs and alcohol. Taylor and Warner separated in December 1981, and divorced a year later in November 1982.

After the divorce from Warner, Taylor was engaged to Mexican lawyer Victor Luna in 1983-1984, and New York businessman Dennis Stein in 1985. She met her seventh - and last - husband, construction worker Larry Fortensky, at the Betty Ford Center in 1988. They were married at the Neverland Ranch of her long-time friend Michael Jackson on October 6, 1991. The wedding was again subject to intense media attention, with one photographer parachuting to the ranch and Taylor selling the wedding pictures to "People" for $1 million, which she used to start her AIDS foundation. Taylor and Fortensky divorced in October 1996.

Taylor was raised as a Christian Scientist, and converted to Judaism in 1959. Although two of her husbands - Mike Todd and Eddie Fisher - were Jewish, Taylor stated that she did not convert because of them, but had wanted to do so "for a long time", and that there was "comfort and dignity and hope for me in this ancient religion that [has] survived for four thousand years... I feel as if I have been a Jew all my life". Walker believed that Taylor was influenced in her decision by her godfather, Victor Cazalet, and her mother, who were active supporters of Zionism during her childhood.

Following her conversion, Taylor became an active supporter of Jewish and Zionist causes. In 1959, she purchased $100,000 worth of Israeli bonds, which led to her films being banned by Muslim countries throughout the Middle East and Africa. She was also barred from entering Egypt to film "Cleopatra" in 1962, but the ban was lifted two years later after the Egyptian officials deemed that the film brought positive publicity for the country. In addition to purchasing bonds, Taylor helped to raise money for organizations such as the Jewish National Fund, and sat on the board of trustees of the Simon Wiesenthal Center.

She also advocated for the right of Soviet Jews to emigrate to Israel, cancelled a visit to the USSR because of its condemnation of Israel due to the Six-Day War, and signed a letter protesting the United Nations General Assembly Resolution 3379 of 1975. In 1976, she offered herself as a replacement hostage after more than 100 Israeli civilians were taken hostage in the Entebbe skyjacking. She had a small role in the television film made about the incident, "Victory at Entebbe" (1976), and narrated "Genocide" (1981), an Academy Award-winning documentary about the Holocaust.

Taylor is considered a fashion icon both for her film costumes and personal style. At MGM, her costumes were mostly designed by Helen Rose and Edith Head, and in the 1960s by Irene Sharaff. Her most famous costumes include a white ball gown in "A Place in the Sun" (1951), a Grecian dress in "Cat on a Hot Tin Roof" (1958), and a slip and a fur coat in "BUtterfield 8" (1960). Her make-up look in "Cleopatra" (1963) started a trend for "cat-eye" make-up done with black eyeliner.

Taylor collected jewelry through her life, and owned the Krupp Diamond, the Taylor-Burton Diamond, and the La Peregrina Pearl, formerly owned by Mary I of England - all three were gifts from husband Richard Burton. She also published a book about her collection, "My Love Affair with Jewelry", in 2002. Taylor helped to popularize the work of fashion designers Valentino Garavani and Halston. She received a Lifetime of Glamour Award from the Council of Fashion Designers of America (CFDA) in 1997. After her death, her jewelry and fashion collections were auctioned by Christie's to benefit her AIDS foundation, ETAF. The jewelry sold for a record-breaking sum of $156.8 million, and the clothes and accessories for a further $5.5 million.

Taylor struggled with health problems for most of her life. She was born with scoliosis, and broke her back while filming "National Velvet" in 1944. The fracture went undetected for several years, although it caused her chronic back problems. In 1956, she underwent an operation in which some of her spinal discs were removed and replaced with donated bone. Taylor was also prone to other illnesses and injuries, which often necessitated surgery; in 1961, she survived a near-fatal bout of pneumonia that required a tracheotomy.

In addition, she was addicted to alcohol and prescription medications. She was treated at the Betty Ford Center for seven weeks from December 1983 to January 1984, becoming the first celebrity to openly admit herself to the clinic. She relapsed later in the decade, and entered rehabilitation again in 1988. Taylor also struggled with her weight - she became overweight during her marriage to Senator John Warner, and published a diet book about her experiences, "Elizabeth Takes Off" (1988). Taylor was a heavy smoker until she experienced a severe bout of pneumonia in 1990.

Taylor's health increasingly declined during the last two decades of her life, and she rarely attended public events in the 2000s. She used a wheelchair due to her back problems, and was diagnosed with congestive heart failure in 2004. Six weeks after being hospitalized, she died of the illness at age 79 on March 23, 2011, at the Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles. Her funeral took place the following day at the Forest Lawn Memorial Park in Glendale, California. The service was a private Jewish ceremony presided over by Rabbi Jerome Cutler. At Taylor's request, the ceremony began 15 minutes behind schedule, as, according to her representative, "she even wanted to be late for her own funeral". She was entombed in the cemetery's Great Mausoleum.

Taylor was one of the last stars of classical Hollywood cinema, and also one of the first modern celebrities. During the era of the studio system, she exemplified the classic film star. She was portrayed as different from "ordinary" people, and her public image was carefully crafted and controlled by MGM. When the era of classical Hollywood ended in the 1960s, and paparazzi photography became a normal feature of media culture, Taylor came to define a new type of celebrity, whose real private life was the focus of public interest. According to Adam Bernstein of "The Washington Post", "More than for any film role, she became famous for being famous, setting a media template for later generations of entertainers, models, and all variety of semi-somebodies."

Regardless of the acting awards she won during her career, Taylor's film performances were often overlooked by contemporary critics; according to film historian Jeanine Basinger, "No actress ever had a more difficult job in getting critics to accept her onscreen as someone other than Elizabeth Taylor... Her persona ate her alive." Her film roles often mirrored her personal life, and many critics continue to regard her as always playing herself, rather than acting. In contrast, Mel Gussow of "The New York Times" stated that "the range of [Taylor's] acting was surprisingly wide", despite the fact that she never received any professional training. Film critic Peter Bradshaw called her "an actress of such sexiness it was an incitement to riot - sultry and queenly at the same time", and "a shrewd, intelligent, intuitive acting presence in her later years". David Thomson stated that "she had the range, nerve, and instinct that only Bette Davis had had before - and like Davis, Taylor was monster and empress, sweetheart and scold, idiot and wise woman". Three films in which she starred - "National Velvet", "Giant", and "Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf?" - have been preserved in the National Film Registry, and the American Film Institute has named her the seventh greatest female screen legend of classical Hollywood cinema.

Taylor has also been discussed by journalists and scholars interested in the role of women in Western society. Camille Paglia writes that Taylor was a "pre-feminist woman" who "wields the sexual power that feminism cannot explain and has tried to destroy. Through stars like Taylor, we sense the world-disordering impact of legendary women like Delilah, Salome, and Helen of Troy." In contrast, cultural critic M.G. Lord calls Taylor an "accidental feminist", stating that while she did not identify as a feminist, many of her films had feminist themes and "introduced a broad audience to feminist ideas". Similarly, Ben W. Heineman, Jr., and Cristine Russell write in "The Atlantic" that her role in "Giant" "dismantled stereotypes about women and minorities".

Taylor is considered a gay icon, and received widespread recognition for her HIV/AIDS activism. After her death, GLAAD issued a statement saying that she "was an icon not only in Hollywood, but in the LGBT community, where she worked to ensure that everyone was treated with the respect and dignity we all deserve", and Sir Nick Partridge of the Terrence Higgins Trust called her "the first major star to publicly fight fear and prejudice towards AIDS". According to Paul Flynn of "The Guardian", she was "a new type of gay icon, one whose position is based not on tragedy, but on her work for the LGBTQ community". Speaking of her charity work, former President Bill Clinton said at her death, "Elizabeth's legacy will live on in many people around the world whose lives will be longer and better because of her work and the ongoing efforts of those she inspired."



</doc>
<doc id="42620" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42620" title="Grace Kelly">
Grace Kelly

Grace Patricia Kelly (November 12, 1929September 14, 1982) was an American actress who became Princess of Monaco after marrying Prince Rainier III, in April 1956.

After embarking on an acting career in 1950, at age 20, Kelly appeared in New York City theatrical productions and more than 40 episodes of live drama productions broadcast during the early 1950s Golden Age of Television. In October 1953, she gained stardom from her performance in the film "Mogambo", which won her a Golden Globe Award and an Academy Award nomination in 1954. Subsequently, she had leading roles in five films, including "The Country Girl" (1954), for which her deglamorized performance earned her an Academy Award for Best Actress. Other films include "High Noon" (1952) with Gary Cooper, "Dial M for Murder" (1954) with Ray Milland, "Rear Window" (1954) with James Stewart, "To Catch a Thief" (1955) with Cary Grant, and "High Society" (1956) with Frank Sinatra and Bing Crosby.

Kelly retired from acting at the age of 26 to marry Rainier and began her duties as Princess of Monaco. They had three children: Caroline, Albert II, and Stéphanie. Kelly retained her link to America by her dual U.S. and Monégasque citizenship. Princess Grace suffered a stroke while driving home to Monaco on September 13, 1982, and had a road accident which led to her death the following day.

Kelly was born on November 12, 1929, at Hahnemann University Hospital in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, to an affluent and influential family. Her father, Irish-American John B. Kelly Sr. (1889–1960), had won three Olympic gold medals for sculling and owned a successful brickwork contracting company that was well-known on the East Coast. A registered Democrat, he was nominated to be mayor of Philadelphia for the 1935 election but lost by the closest margin in the city's history. In later years, he served on the Fairmount Park Commission and, during World War II, was appointed by President Roosevelt as National Director of Physical Fitness. Two of his brothers were also notable: Walter C. Kelly (1873–1939) was a vaudeville star who also made films for Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer and Paramount Pictures, and George Kelly (1887–1974) was a Pulitzer Prize-winning dramatist, screenwriter, and director.

Kelly's mother was Philadelphia native Margaret Katherine Majer (1898–1990); the daughter of German immigrants. Margaret had taught physical education at the University of Pennsylvania and had been the first woman to coach women's athletics at the institution. She was noted for her beauty and modeled for a time in her youth. After marrying John B. Kelly in 1924, Margaret focused on being a housewife until all her children were of school age, following which she began actively participating in various civic organizations.

Kelly had two older siblings, Margaret (1925–1991) and John Jr. (1927–1985), and a younger sister, Elizabeth (1933–2009). The children were raised in the Roman Catholic faith.

While attending Ravenhill Academy, a prestigious Catholic girls' school, Kelly modeled fashions at local social events with her mother and sisters. In 1942, at the age of 12, she played the lead in "Don't Feed the Animals", a play produced by the East Falls Old Academy Players. Before graduating in May 1947 from Stevens School, a socially prominent private institution on Walnut Lane in the Northwest Philadelphia neighborhood of Germantown, she acted and danced. Her graduation yearbook listed her favorite actress as Ingrid Bergman and her favorite actor as Joseph Cotten. Written in the "Stevens' Prophecy" section was: "Miss Grace P. Kelly – a famous star of stage and screen".

Owing to her low mathematics scores, Kelly was rejected by Bennington College in July 1947.

Despite her parents' initial disapproval, Kelly decided to pursue her dreams of being an actress. John was particularly displeased with her decision; he viewed acting as "a slim cut above streetwalker." To start her career, she auditioned for the American Academy of Dramatic Arts in New York, using a scene from her uncle George Kelly's "The Torch-Bearers" (1923). Although the school had already met its semester quota, she obtained an interview with the admission officer, Emile Diestel, and was admitted through the influence of George.. She began her first term the following October. While at school, she lived in Manhattan's Barbizon Hotel for Women, a prestigious establishment which barred men from entering after 10 pm, and she worked as a model to support her studies.

Kelly worked diligently and practiced her speech by using a tape recorder. Her early acting pursuits led her to the stage, most notably a Broadway debut in Strindberg's "The Father" alongside Raymond Massey. At 19, her graduation performance was as Tracy Lord in "The Philadelphia Story".

Television producer Delbert Mann cast Kelly as Bethel Merriday, in an adaptation of the Sinclair Lewis novel of the same name; this was her first of nearly sixty live television programs. Success on television eventually brought her a role in a major motion picture. She made her film debut in a small role in the 1951 film "Fourteen Hours". She was noticed during a visit to the set by Gary Cooper, who subsequently starred with her in "High Noon" (1951). He was charmed by her and said that she was "different from all these actresses we've been seeing so much of." However, Kelly's performance in "Fourteen Hours" was not noticed by critics and did not lead to her receiving other film acting roles. She continued her work in the theater and on television, although she lacked "vocal horsepower" and would likely not have had a lengthy stage career. She had various roles on television shows produced by NBC and CBS. She was performing in Denver's Elitch Gardens when she received a telegram from Hollywood producer Stanley Kramer offering her a co-starring role opposite Gary Cooper in "High Noon" (1951).

Director John Ford had first noticed Kelly in a 1950 screen test. The studio flew her to Los Angeles to audition in September 1952, and he said that she showed "breeding, quality and class." She was hired for the role of Linda Nordley in the film 'Mogambo' and was offered a seven-year contract with MGM on a salary of $850 a week. She signed the deal under two conditions: That every two years she could get time off to do theater performances, and that she could live in New York City at the now-landmarked Manhattan House (200 E. 66th Street).
Two months after signing her contract, Kelly and the cast arrived in Nairobi to begin production of the film. Gene Tierney was initially cast in the role, but she had to drop out at the last minute because of personal issues. Upon getting the role, Kelly told Hollywood columnist Hedda Hopper, ""Mogambo" had three things that interested me. John Ford, Clark Gable, and a trip to Africa with expenses paid. If "Mogambo" had been made in Arizona, I wouldn't have done it." A break in the filming schedule afforded her and "Mogambo" co-star Ava Gardner a visit to Rome. Her role as Linda Nordley in MGM's production of "Mogambo" garnered her a Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actress and her first Academy Award nomination for Best Supporting Actress.

After the success of "Mogambo", Kelly starred in a TV play "The Way of an Eagle" with Jean-Pierre Aumont, before being cast in the film adaptation of Frederick Knott's Broadway hit "Dial M for Murder". Director Alfred Hitchcock also saw the 1950 screen test and took full advantage of her beauty on-camera. He was one of her last mentors in the film industry.

In January 1954, Kelly began filming scenes for her next film, "The Bridges at Toko-Ri", with William Holden. She played Nancy, the wife of naval officer Harry (Holden), who was a minor but pivotal character in the story. In a film review released 12 months later, "The New Yorker" remarked on the apparent on-screen chemistry between them and took note of her delivery of her performance "with quiet confidence."

Kelly unhesitatingly turned down the opportunity to star alongside Marlon Brando in "On the Waterfront" (1954). Eva Marie Saint, who replaced her, won an Academy Award for that role.

Kelly committed to the role of Lisa Fremont in "Rear Window" instead. Said Kelly, "All through the making of "Dial M for Murder", he (Hitchcock) sat and talked to me about "Rear Window" all the time, even before we had discussed my being in it." During the shooting of "Dial M for Murder", they shared a close bond of humor and admiration, although minor strife sometimes emerged on set.

Kelly's new costar, James Stewart, was highly enthusiastic about working with her. The role of Lisa Fremont, a wealthy Manhattan socialite and model, was unlike any of the previous women she had played. For the very first time, she portrayed an independent, career-driven woman. He played a speculative photographer with a broken leg, bound to a wheelchair, and so reduced to curiously observing the happenings outside his window.

Just as he had done earlier, Hitchcock provided the camera with a slow-sequenced silhouette of Kelly, along with a close-up of the two stars kissing, finally lingering closely on her profile.

With the film's opening in October 1954, Kelly was praised again. "Variety"'s film critic remarked on the casting, commenting on the "earthy quality to the relationship between Stewart and Miss Kelly. Both do a fine job of the picture's acting demands."

Kelly won the role of Bing Crosby's long-suffering wife, Georgie Elgin, in "The Country Girl" (1954), after a pregnant Jennifer Jones bowed out. Already familiar with the play, Kelly was highly interested in the part. To cast her, MGM would have had to lend her out to Paramount; Kelly was adamant and threatened the studio that if they did not allow her to do the film she would pack her bags and leave for New York for good. They relented, and the part was hers.

The film paired her again with William Holden. Kelly's character, the wife of a washed-up alcoholic singer, played by Crosby, is emotionally torn between two lovers.

For her performance in "The Country Girl", Kelly won the Academy Award for Best Actress. Her main competitor for the prize was Judy Garland, in her much heralded comeback performance in "A Star Is Born" (1956).

Although Kelly won the New York Film Critics Circle Award for best actress for her performances in her three big movie roles of 1954, "Rear Window", "Dial M For Murder", and "The Country Girl", she and Garland both received Golden Globe Awards for their respective performances.

By the following March, the race between Kelly and Garland for the Oscar was very close. On March 30, 1955, the night of the Academy Awards telecast, Garland was unable to attend because she was in the hospital having just given birth to her son, Joey Luft. However, she was rumored to be the odds-on favorite, and NBC Television cameras were set up in her hospital room so that if she were announced as the winner, she could make her acceptance speech live from her hospital bed. However, when William Holden announced Kelly as the winner, the technicians immediately dismantled the cameras without saying one word to Garland.

In April 1954, Kelly flew to Colombia for a 10-day shoot on her next project, "Green Fire", with Stewart Granger. She played Catherine Knowland, a coffee plantation owner. Granger wrote in his autobiography of his distaste for the film's script, while Kelly later confided to Hedda Hopper, "It wasn't pleasant. We worked at a pathetic village – miserable huts and dirty. Part of the crew got shipwrecked … It was awful." Although "Green Fire" got lackluster reviews, the film made a profit of $840,000.

After the consecutive filming of "Rear Window", "Toko-Ri", "Country Girl", and "Green Fire", Kelly flew to France, along with department store heir Bernard "Barney" Strauss, to begin work on her third and last film for Alfred Hitchcock, "To Catch a Thief". She and her costar, Cary Grant, developed a mutual admiration and cherished their time together for the rest of their lives. Years later, when asked to name his all-time favorite actress, he replied without hesitation, "Well, with all due respect to dear Ingrid Bergman, I much preferred Grace. She had serenity."

Kelly headed the U.S. delegation at the Cannes Film Festival in April 1955. While there, she was invited to participate in a photo session at the Palace of Monaco with Prince Rainier III, the sovereign of the principality. After a series of delays and complications, she met him in Monaco. At the time of her initial meeting with him, she was dating the French actor Jean-Pierre Aumont.

Upon returning to America, Kelly began work on "The Swan", in which she coincidentally portrayed a princess, and she meanwhile began a private correspondence with Rainier.

In December 1955, Rainier went to America on a trip officially designated as a tour, although it was speculated that he was seeking a wife, as a treaty with France in 1918 (which resulted from the Monaco Succession Crisis of 1918), stated that if he did not produce an heir Monaco would revert to France. At a press conference in the United States, when asked if he were pursuing a wife, he answered, "No." Then a second question was posed: "If you were pursuing a wife, what kind would you like?" Rainier smiled and answered, "I don't know – the best."

That same year MGM released Kelly's last film, the musical comedy "High Society", based on the studio's comedy "The Philadelphia Story" (1940). Kelly wore her own engagement ring in the film and sang a duet with Bing Crosby, "True Love," a song with words and music by Cole Porter.

While in the United States, Rainier met Kelly and her family, and after three days, he proposed. She accepted, and the families began preparations for what the press at that time dubbed "The Wedding of the Century". 

The religious wedding was set for April 19, 1956. News of the engagement was a sensation, even though it meant a probable end to Kelly's film career. Alfred Hitchcock quipped that he was "very happy that Grace has found herself such a good part."

The preparations were elaborate. The Palace of Monaco was painted and redecorated throughout. On April 4, 1956, Grace, with her family, bridesmaids, poodle, and over 80 pieces of luggage, boarded the ocean liner SS "Constitution", bound for the French Riviera. Some 400 reporters applied to sail, although most were turned away. Thousands of fans sent the party off for the eight-day voyage. More than 20,000 people lined the streets of Monaco to greet the future princess consort.
The Napoleonic Code of Monaco and the laws of the Roman Catholic Church necessitated two ceremonies – both a civil ceremony and a religious wedding. The 16-minute civil ceremony took place in the Palace Throne Room of Monaco on April 18, 1956, and a reception later in the day was attended by 3,000 Monaco citizens. To cap the ceremony, the 142 official titles that she acquired in the union (counterparts of her husband's) were formally recited. The following day the church ceremony took place at Monaco's Saint Nicholas Cathedral, before Bishop Gilles Barthe. The wedding was estimated to have been watched by over 30 million viewers on live television and was described by biographer Robert Lacey as "the first modern event to generate media overkill". Her wedding dress, designed by MGM's Academy Award–winning Helen Rose, was worked on for six weeks by three dozen seamstresses. The bridesmaids' gowns were designed by Joe Allen Hong at Neiman Marcus. The 700 guests included several famous people, including Aristotle Onassis, Cary Grant, David Niven and his wife Hjördis, Gloria Swanson, Ava Gardner, the crowned head Aga Khan III, Gloria Guinness, Enid, Lady Kenmare, Daisy Fellowes, Etti Plesch, Lady Diana Cooper, Louise de Vilmorin, Loelia Lindsay, and Conrad Hilton. Frank Sinatra was invited but did not attend. Kelly and Rainier left that night for their seven-week Mediterranean honeymoon cruise on his yacht, "Deo Juvante II".

The couple had three children:
Hitchcock offered Kelly the lead in his film "Marnie" in 1962. She was eager, but public outcry in Monaco against her involvement in a film where she would play a kleptomaniac made her reconsider and ultimately reject the project. Director Herbert Ross attempted to lure her into accepting a part in his 1977 film "The Turning Point", but Rainier quashed the idea. Later that year, she returned to the arts in a series of poetry readings on stage and narration of the documentary "The Children of Theater Street". She also narrated ABC's made-for-television film "The Poppy Is Also a Flower" (1966). She and Rainier worked together in a 33-minute independent film called "Rearranged" in 1979, which received interest from ABC TV executives in 1982 after premiering in Monaco, on the condition that it be extended to an hour. Before more scenes could be shot, Kelly died and the film was never released or shown publicly again.

On September 13, 1982, Kelly was driving back to Monaco from her country home in Roc Agel when she had a stroke. As a result, she lost control of her 1971 Rover P6 3500 and drove off the steep, winding road and down the mountainside. Her daughter Stéphanie, who was in the passenger seat, tried, but failed, to regain control of the car. When paramedics arrived at the accident site (), Kelly was alive but unconscious and in critical condition. She and Stéphanie were transported to the Monaco Hospital (later named the Princess Grace Hospital Centre). At the hospital, doctors attempted to resuscitate Grace but because of the extent of her brain injury and injuries to her thorax and a fractured femur, they were unable to save her life. Doctors believed that she had suffered a minor stroke that may have caused the car to veer off the road causing the accident. She died the following night at 10:55 p.m., age 52, after Rainier chose to take his wife off life support.

Stéphanie's original diagnosis was mild, with only minor bruising and a light concussion. However, after receiving X-ray results, she was found to have suffered a hairline fracture on the seventh cervical vertebra. She was unable to attend her mother's funeral because of her injuries.

Kelly's funeral was held at the Saint Nicholas Cathedral, Monaco on September 18, 1982. After a Requiem Mass, she was buried in the Grimaldi family vault. Over 400 people attended, including Cary Grant, Nancy Reagan, and Diana, Princess of Wales. At a later memorial service in Beverly Hills, James Stewart delivered the following eulogy:

Rainier, who did not remarry, was buried alongside her following his death in 2005.

During her marriage, Kelly was unable to continue her acting career. Instead, she performed her daily duties as princess and became involved in philanthropic work.

She founded AMADE Mondiale, a Monaco-based non-profit organization that was eventually recognized by the UN as a Non-Governmental organization. According to UNESCO's website, AMADE promotes and protects the "moral and physical integrity" and "spiritual well-being of children throughout the world, without distinction of race, nationality or religion and in a spirit of complete political independence." Her daughter, Princess Caroline, carries the torch for AMADE today in her role as President.

Kelly was also active in improving the arts institutions of Monaco, forming the Princess Grace Foundation in 1964 to support local artisans. In 1983, following her death, Princess Caroline assumed the duties of President of the Board of Trustees of the Foundation; Prince Albert is Vice-President.

The Princess Grace Foundation-USA (PGF-USA) was established, following Kelly's death, to continue the work she had done, anonymously, during her lifetime,:assisting emerging theater, dance and film artists in America. Incorporated in 1982, PGF-USA is headquartered in New York and is a tax-exempt, not-for-profit, publicly supported organization. The Princess Grace Awards, a program of the Princess Grace Foundation-USA, has awarded nearly 500 artists at more than 100 institutions in the U.S. with more than $7 million to date. The foundation also says it "holds the exclusive rights and facilitates the licensing of her name and likeness throughout the world."

Kelly was one of the first celebrities to support and speak on behalf of La Leche League, an organization that advocates breastfeeding. She also planned a yearly Christmas party for local orphans and dedicated a Garden Club.

While pregnant with her daughter Caroline in 1956, Kelly was frequently photographed clutching a distinctive leather hand-bag manufactured by Hermès. The purse, or Sac à dépêches, was likely a shield to prevent her pregnant abdomen from being exposed to the prying eyes of the paparazzi. The photographs, however, popularized the purse and became so closely associated with the fashion icon that it would thereafter be known as the Kelly Bag.

Kelly was inaugurated into the International Best Dressed List Hall of Fame in 1960.

Numerous exhibitions have been held of Kelly's life and clothing. The Philadelphia Museum of Art presented her wedding dress in a 2006 exhibition to mark the 50th anniversary of her marriage, and a retrospective of her wardrobe was held at London's Victoria and Albert Museum in 2010. The V&A exhibition continued in Australia at the Bendigo Art Gallery in 2012. This famous dress, seen around the world, took thirty five tailors six weeks to complete. An exhibition of her life as Princess of Monaco was held at the Ekaterina Cultural Foundation in Moscow in 2008 in conjunction with Monaco's Grimaldi Forum. In 2009, a plaque was placed on the "Rodeo Drive Walk of Style" in recognition of her contributions to style and fashion.

After her death, Kelly's legacy as a fashion icon lived on. Modern designers, such as Tommy Hilfiger and Zac Posen, have cited her as a fashion inspiration. During her lifetime, she was known for introducing the "fresh faced" look, one that involved bright skin and natural beauty with little makeup. Her fashion legacy was even commemorated at the Victoria and Albert Museum of London, where an exhibit titled, "Grace Kelly: Style Icon" paid tribute to her impact on the world of fashion. The exhibit included 50 of her legendary ensembles. She is remembered for her "college-girl" everyday fashion, defined by her pulled-together yet simple look.

In 1955, Kelly was photographed by Howell Conant in Jamaica. He photographed her without makeup in a naturalistic setting, a departure from the traditional portrayal of actresses. The resulting photographs were published in "Collier's" magazine, with a celebrated photo of her rising from the water with wet hair making the cover. Following her marriage, Conant was the unofficial photographer to the House of Grimaldi and extensively photographed her, Rainier, and their three children. In 1992, Conant published "Grace", a book of photographs that he took during her 26-year tenure as Princess of Monaco.

Kelly has been depicted by many pop artists including James Gill and Andy Warhol. Warhol made a portrait of her for the Institute of Contemporary Art, Philadelphia as a limited edition silkscreen in 1984.

A rose garden in Monaco's Fontvieille district is dedicated to the memory of Kelly. It was opened in 1984 by Rainier. She is commemorated in a statue by Kees Verkade in the garden, which features 4,000 roses.

In 2003, the Henley Royal Regatta renamed the Women's Quadruple Sculls the "Princess Grace Challenge Cup." Kelly was invited to present the prizes at the Henley Royal Regatta in 1981, as a peace offering by the Henley Stewards to put a conflict between her family and Stewards to rest. Prince Albert presented the prizes at the Henley Royal Regatta in 2004.

In 2012, Kelly's childhood home was made a Pennsylvania historic landmark, and an historical marker was placed on the site. The home, located at 3901 Henry Avenue in the East Falls section of Philadelphia, was built by her father, John B. Kelly Sr., in 1929. Grace lived in the home until 1950, and Prince Rainier III proposed to her there in 1955. The Kelly family sold the property in 1974, following the death of Grace's mother, Margaret.

In October 2016, Prince Albert of Monaco purchased the property, speculating that the home would be used either as museum space or as offices for the Princess Grace Foundation.
















</doc>
<doc id="202664" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=202664" title="Diane Keaton">
Diane Keaton

Diane Keaton (née Hall; born January 5, 1946) is an American film actress, director and producer. She began her career on stage and made her screen debut in 1970. Her first major film role was as Kay Adams-Corleone in "The Godfather" (1972), but the films that shaped her early career were those with director and co-star Woody Allen, beginning with "Play It Again, Sam" in 1972. Her next two films with Allen, "Sleeper" (1973) and "Love and Death" (1975), established her as a comic actor. Her fourth, "Annie Hall" (1977), won her the Academy Award for Best Actress.

Keaton subsequently expanded her range to avoid becoming typecast as her "Annie Hall" persona. She became an accomplished dramatic performer, starring in "Looking for Mr. Goodbar" (1977) and received Academy Award nominations for "Reds" (1981), "Marvin's Room" (1996) and "Something's Gotta Give" (2003). 

Some of her popular later films include "Baby Boom" (1987), "Father of the Bride" (1991), "The First Wives Club" (1996), and "The Family Stone" (2005). Keaton's films have earned a cumulative gross of over US$1.1billion in North America. In addition to acting, she is also a photographer, real estate developer, author, and occasional singer.

Diane Keaton was born as Diane Hall on January 5, 1946, in Los Angeles, California. Her mother, Dorothy Deanne (née Keaton; 1921–2008), was a homemaker and amateur photographer; her father, John Newton Ignatius "Jack" Hall (1922–1990), was a real estate broker and civil engineer. Keaton was raised a Free Methodist by her mother. Her mother won the "Mrs. Los Angeles" pageant for homemakers; Keaton has said that the theatricality of the event inspired her first impulse to be an actress, and led to her wanting to work on stage. She has also credited Katharine Hepburn, whom she admires for playing strong and independent women, as one of her inspirations.

Keaton is a 1964 graduate of Santa Ana High School in Santa Ana, California. During her time there, she participated in singing and acting clubs at school, and starred as Blanche DuBois in a school production of "A Streetcar Named Desire". After graduation, she attended Santa Ana College, and later Orange Coast College as an acting student, but dropped out after a year to pursue an entertainment career in Manhattan. Upon joining the Actors' Equity Association, she changed her surname to Keaton, her mother's maiden name, as there was already an actress registered under the name of Diane Hall. For a brief time, she also moonlighted at nightclubs with a singing act. She would later revisit her nightclub act in "Annie Hall" (1977) and "And So It Goes" (2014), and a cameo in "Radio Days" (1987).

Keaton began studying acting at the Neighborhood Playhouse in New York City. She initially studied acting under the Meisner technique, an ensemble acting technique first evolved in the 1930s by Sanford Meisner, a New York stage actor/acting coach/director who had been a member of The Group Theater (1931–1940). She has described her acting technique as, "<nowiki>[</nowiki>being<nowiki>]</nowiki> only as good as the person you're acting with ... As opposed to going it on my own and forging my path to create a wonderful performance without the help of anyone. I always need the help of everyone!" According to Jack Nicholson, "She approaches a script sort of like a play in that she has the entire script memorized before you start doing the movie, which I don't know any other actors doing that."

In 1968, Keaton became a member of the "Tribe" and understudy to Sheila in the original Broadway production of "Hair". She gained some notoriety for her refusal to disrobe at the end of Act I when the cast performs nude, even though nudity in the production was optional for actors (Those who performed nude received a $50 bonus). After acting in "Hair" for nine months, she auditioned for a part in Woody Allen's production of "Play It Again, Sam". After nearly being passed over for being too tall (at 5ft 8 in./1.73m she is twoinches/fivecm taller than Allen), she won the part.

After being nominated for a Tony Award for "Play It Again, Sam", Keaton made her film debut in "Lovers and Other Strangers" (1970). She followed with guest roles on the television series "Love, American Style" and "Night Gallery", and "Mannix". Between films, Keaton appeared in a series of deodorant commercials.

Keaton's breakthrough role came two years later when she was cast as Kay Adams, the girlfriend and eventual wife of Michael Corleone (played by Al Pacino) in Francis Ford Coppola's 1972 film "The Godfather". Coppola noted that he first noticed Keaton in "Lovers and Other Strangers", and cast her because of her reputation for eccentricity that he wanted her to bring to the role (Keaton claims that at the time she was commonly referred to as "the kooky actress" of the film industry). Her performance in the film was loosely based on her real life experience of making the film, both of which she has described as being "the woman in a world of men." "The Godfather" was an unparalleled critical and financial success, becoming the highest-grossing film of the year and winning the Best Picture Oscar of 1972.

Two years later she reprised her role as Kay Adams in "The Godfather Part II". She was initially reluctant, stating that, "At first, I was skeptical about playing Kay again in the "Godfather" sequel. But when I read the script, the character seemed much more substantial than in the first movie." In "Part II", her character changed dramatically, becoming more embittered about her husband's activities. Even though Keaton received widespread exposure from the films, her character's importance was minimal. "Time" wrote that she was "invisible in "The Godfather" and pallid in "The Godfather, Part II"."

Keaton's other notable films of the 1970s included many collaborations with Woody Allen; although by the time they made films together, their romantic involvement had ended. She played many eccentric characters in several of his comic and dramatic films, including "Sleeper", "Love and Death", "Interiors", "Manhattan", and the film version of "Play It Again, Sam", directed by Herbert Ross. Allen has credited Keaton as his muse during his early film career.

In 1977, Keaton starred with Allen in the romantic comedy "Annie Hall", one of her most famous roles. "Annie Hall", written by Allen and Marshall Brickman and directed by Allen, was believed to be autobiographical of his relationship with Keaton. Allen based the character of Annie Hall loosely on Keaton ("Annie" is a nickname of hers, and "Hall" is her original surname). Many of Keaton's mannerisms and her self-deprecating sense of humor were added into the role by Allen. (Director Nancy Meyers has claimed "Diane's the most self-deprecating person alive.") Keaton has also said that Allen wrote the character as an "idealized version" of herself. The two starred as a frequently on-again, off-again couple living in New York City. Her acting was later summed up by CNN as "awkward, self-deprecating, speaking in endearing little whirlwinds of semi-logic", and by Allen as a "nervous breakdown in slow motion." The film was both a major financial and critical success, and won the Academy Award for Best Picture. Keaton's performance also won the Academy Award for Best Actress. In 2006, "Premiere" magazine ranked Keaton in "Annie Hall" as 60th on its list of the "100 Greatest Performances of All Time," and noted:
It's hard to play ditzy. ... The genius of Annie is that despite her loopy backhand, awful driving, and nervous tics, she's also a complicated, intelligent woman. Keaton brilliantly displays this dichotomy of her character, especially when she yammers away on a first date with Alvy (Woody Allen) while the subtitle reads, 'He probably thinks I'm a yoyo.' Yo-yo? Hardly.
Keaton's eccentric wardrobe in "Annie Hall", which consisted mainly of vintage men's clothing, including neckties, vests, baggy pants, and fedora hats, made her an unlikely fashion icon of the late 1970s. A small amount of the clothing seen in the film came from Keaton herself, who was already known for her tomboyish clothing style years before "Annie Hall", and Ruth Morley designed the movie's costumes. Soon after the film's release, men's clothing and pantsuits became popular attire for women. She is known to favor men's vintage clothing, and usually appears in public wearing gloves and conservative attire. (A 2005 profile in the "San Francisco Chronicle" described her as "easy to find. Look for the only woman in sight dressed in a turtleneck on a 90-degree afternoon in Pasadena.)

Her photo by Douglas Kirkland appeared on the cover of the September 26, 1977, issue of "Time" magazine, with the story dubbing her "the funniest woman now working in films." Later that year, she departed from her usual lighthearted comic roles when she won the highly coveted lead role in the drama "Looking for Mr. Goodbar", based on the novel by Judith Rossner. In the film, she played a Catholic schoolteacher for deaf children, who lives a double life, spending nights frequenting singles bars and engaging in promiscuous sex. Keaton became interested in the role after seeing it as a "psychological case history." The same issue of "Time" commended her role choice and criticized the restricted roles available for female actors in American films: A male actor can fly a plane, fight a war, shoot a badman, pull off a sting, impersonate a big cheese in business or politics. Men are presumed to be interesting. A female can play a wife, play a whore, get pregnant, lose her baby, and, um, let's see ... Women are presumed to be dull. ... Now a determined trend spotter can point to a handful of new films whose makers think that women can bear the dramatic weight of a production alone, or virtually so. Then there is Diane Keaton in "Looking for Mr. Goodbar". As Theresa Dunn, Keaton dominates this raunchy, risky, violent dramatization of Judith Rossner's 1975 novel about a schoolteacher who cruises singles bars.

In addition to acting, Keaton has stated that "<nowiki>[I]</nowiki> had a lifelong ambition to be a singer." She had a brief, unrealized career as a recording artist in the 1970s. Her first record was an original cast recording of "Hair", in 1971. In 1977, she began recording tracks for a solo album, but the finished record never materialized.

Keaton met with more success in the medium of still photography. Like her character in "Annie Hall", Keaton had long relished photography as a favorite hobby, an interest she picked up as a teenager from her mother. While traveling in the late 1970s, she began exploring her avocation more seriously. "Rolling Stone had asked me to take photographs for them, and I thought, 'Wait a minute, what I'm really interested in is these lobbies, and these strange ballrooms in these old hotels.' So I began shooting them", she recalled in 2003. "These places were deserted, and I could just sneak in anytime and nobody cared. It was so easy and I could do it myself. It was an adventure for me." "Reservations", her collection of photos of hotel interiors, was published in book form in 1980.

In "Manhattan" in 1979, Keaton and Woody Allen ended their long working relationship, and the film would be their last major collaboration until 1993. In 1978, she became romantically involved with Warren Beatty, and two years later he cast her to play opposite him in "Reds". In the film, she played Louise Bryant, a journalist and feminist, who flees from her husband to work with radical journalist John Reed (Beatty), and later enters Russia to locate him as he chronicles the Russian Civil War. "The New York Times" wrote that Keaton was, "nothing less than splendid as Louise Bryant– beautiful, selfish, funny and driven. It's the best work she has done to date." Keaton received her second Academy Award nomination for the film.

Beatty cast Keaton after seeing her in "Annie Hall", as he wanted to bring her natural nervousness and insecure attitude to the role. The production of "Reds" was delayed several times following its conception in 1977, and Keaton almost left the project when she believed it would never be produced. Filming finally began two years later. In a 2006 "Vanity Fair" story, Keaton described her role as "the everyman of that piece, as someone who wanted to be extraordinary but was probably more ordinary ... I knew what it felt like to be extremely insecure." Assistant director Simon Relph later stated that Louise Bryant was one of Keaton's most difficult roles, and that "<nowiki>[she]</nowiki> almost got broken."

1984 brought "The Little Drummer Girl", Keaton's first excursion into the thriller and action genre. "The Little Drummer Girl" was both a financial and critical failure, with critics claiming that Keaton was miscast for the genre, such as one review from "The New Republic" claiming that "the title role, the pivotal role, is played by Diane Keaton, and around her the picture collapses in tatters. She is so feeble, so inappropriate." However, that same year she received positive reviews for her performance in "Mrs. Soffel", a film based on the true story of a repressed prison warden's wife who falls in love with a convicted murderer and arranges for his escape. Two years later she starred with Jessica Lange and Sissy Spacek in "Crimes of the Heart", adapted from Beth Henley's Pulitzer Prize-winning play into a moderately successful screen comedy. In 1987, she starred in "Baby Boom", her first of four collaborations with writer-producer Nancy Meyers. In "Baby Boom", Keaton starred as a Manhattan career woman who is suddenly forced to care for a toddler. That same year she made a cameo in Allen's film "Radio Days" as a nightclub singer. 1988's "The Good Mother" was a misstep for Keaton. The film was a financial disappointment (according to Keaton, the film was "a Big Failure. Like, BIG failure"), and some critics panned her performance, such as one review from "The Washington Post": "her acting degenerates into hype– as if she's trying to sell an idea she can't fully believe in."

In 1987, Keaton directed and edited her first feature film, a documentary named "Heaven" about the possibility of an afterlife. "Heaven" met with mixed critical reaction, with "The New York Times" likening it to "a conceit imposed on its subjects." Over the next four years, Keaton went on to direct music videos for artists such as Belinda Carlisle, two television films starring Patricia Arquette, and episodes of the series "China Beach" and "Twin Peaks".

By the 1990s, Keaton had established herself as one of the most popular and versatile actors in Hollywood. She shifted to more mature roles, frequently playing matriarchs of middle-class families. Of her role choices and avoidance of becoming typecast, she said: "Most often a particular role does you some good and Bang! You have loads of offers, all of them for similar roles ... I have tried to break away from the usual roles and have tried my hand at several things."

She began the decade with "The Lemon Sisters", a poorly received comedy/drama that she starred in and produced, which was shelved for a year after its completion. In 1991, Keaton starred with Steve Martin in the family comedy "Father of the Bride". She was almost not cast in the film, as the commercial failure of "The Good Mother" had strained her relationship with Walt Disney Pictures, the studio of both films. "Father of the Bride" was Keaton's first major hit after four years of commercial disappointments.

Keaton reprised her role four years later in the sequel, as a woman who becomes pregnant in middle age at the same time as her daughter. A review of the film for "The San Francisco Examiner" was one of many in which Keaton once again received comparison to Katharine Hepburn: "No longer relying on that stuttering uncertainty that seeped into all her characterizations of the 1970s, she has somehow become Katharine Hepburn with a deep maternal instinct, that is, she is a fine and intelligent actress who doesn't need to be tough and edgy in order to prove her feminism."

Keaton reprised her role of Kay Adams in 1990's "The Godfather Part III". Set 20 years after the end of "The Godfather, Part II", Keaton's part had evolved into the estranged ex-wife of Michael Corleone. Criticism of the film and Keaton again centered on her character's unimportance in the film. "The Washington Post" wrote: "Even though she is authoritative in the role, Keaton suffers tremendously from having no real function except to nag Michael for his past sins." In 1993, Keaton starred in "Manhattan Murder Mystery", her first major film role in a Woody Allen film since 1979, having made a cameo in 1987's "Radio Days". Her part was originally intended for Mia Farrow, but Farrow dropped out of the project after her split with Allen.

In 1995, Keaton directed "Unstrung Heroes", her first theatrically released narrative film. The movie, adapted from Franz Lidz's memoir, starred Nathan Watt as a boy in 1960s whose mother (Andie MacDowell) becomes ill with cancer. As her sickness advances and his inventor father (John Turturro) grows increasingly distant, the boy is sent to live with his two eccentric uncles (Maury Chaykin and Michael Richards). In a geographic switch, Keaton shifted the story's setting from the New York of Lidz's book to the Southern California of her own childhood. And the four mad uncles were reduced to a whimsical odd couple. In an essay for "The New York Times", Lidz said that the cinematic Selma had died not of cancer, but of 'Old Movie Disease'. "Someday somebody may find a cure for cancer, but the terminal sappiness of cancer movies is probably beyond remedy."
Though it played in a relatively limited release and made little impression at the box office, the film and its direction were generally well-received critically.

Keaton's most successful film of the decade was the 1996 comedy "The First Wives Club". She starred with Goldie Hawn and Bette Midler as a trio of "first wives": middle-aged women who had been divorced by their husbands in favor of younger women. Keaton claimed that making the film "saved <nowiki>[her]</nowiki> life." The film was a major success, grossing US$105million at the North American box office, and it developed a cult following among middle-aged women. Reviews of the film were generally positive for Keaton and her co-stars, and she was even referred to by "The San Francisco Chronicle" as "probably <nowiki>[one of]</nowiki> the best comic film actresses alive." In 1997, Keaton, along Hawn and Midler, was a recipient of the Women in Film Crystal Award, which honors "outstanding women who, through their endurance and the excellence of their work, have helped to expand the role of women within the entertainment industry."

Also in 1996, Keaton starred as Bessie, a woman with leukemia, in "Marvin's Room", an adaptation of the play by Scott McPherson. Meryl Streep played her estranged sister Lee, and had also initially been considered for the role of Bessie. The film also starred a young Leonardo DiCaprio as Lee's rebellious son. Roger Ebert stated that "Streep and Keaton, in their different styles, find ways to make Lee and Bessie into much more than the expression of their problems." Keaton earned a third Academy Award nomination for the film, which was critically acclaimed. Keaton said that the biggest challenge of the role was understanding the mentality of a person with terminal illness.

In 1999 Keaton narrated the one-hour public-radio documentary "If I Get Out Alive," the first to focus on the conditions and brutality faced by young people in the adult correctional system. The program, produced by Lichtenstein Creative Media, aired on public radio stations across the country, and was honored with a First Place National Headliner Award and a Casey Medal for Meritorious Journalism.

Keaton's first film of 2000 was "Hanging Up" with Meg Ryan and Lisa Kudrow. Keaton also directed the film, despite claiming in a 1996 interview that she would never direct herself in a film, saying "as a director, you automatically have different goals. I can't think about directing when I'm acting." The film was a drama about three sisters coping with the senility and eventual death of their elderly father, played by Walter Matthau. "Hanging Up" rated poorly with critics and grossed a modest US$36million at the North American box office.

In 2001, Keaton co-starred with Warren Beatty in "Town & Country", a critical and financial fiasco. Budgeted at an estimated US$90million, the film opened to little notice and grossed only US$7million in its North American theatrical run. Peter Travers of "Rolling Stone" wrote that "Town & Country" was "less deserving of a review than it is an obituary...The corpse took with it the reputations of its starry cast, including Warren Beatty and Diane Keaton." Also in 2001, and 2002, Keaton starred in four low-budget television films. She played a fanatical nun in the religious drama "Sister Mary Explains It All", an impoverished mother in the drama "On Thin Ice," and a bookkeeper in the mob comedy "Plan B". In "Crossed Over," she played Beverly Lowry, a woman who forms an unusual friendship with the only woman executed while on death row in Texas, Karla Faye Tucker.

Keaton's first major hit since 1996 came in 2003's "Something's Gotta Give", directed by Nancy Meyers and co-starring Jack Nicholson. Nicholson and Keaton, aged 66 and 57 respectively, were seen as bold casting choices for leads in a romantic comedy. Twentieth Century Fox, the film's original studio, reportedly declined to produce the film, fearing that the lead characters were too old to be bankable. Keaton commented about the situation in "Ladies' Home Journal": "Let's face it, people my age and Jack's age are much deeper, much more soulful, because they've seen a lot of life. They have a great deal of passion and hope—why shouldn't they fall in love? Why shouldn't movies show that?" Keaton played a middle-aged playwright who falls in love with her daughter's much older boyfriend. The film was a major success at the box office, grossing US$125million in North America. Roger Ebert wrote that "Nicholson and Keaton bring so much experience, knowledge and humor to their characters that the film works in ways the screenplay might not have even hoped for." The following year, Keaton received her fourth Academy Award nomination for her role in the film.

Keaton's only film between the years of 2004 and 2006 was the comedy "The Family Stone" (2005), starring an ensemble cast that also included Sarah Jessica Parker, Claire Danes, Rachel McAdams, and Craig T. Nelson. In the film, scripted and directed by Thomas Bezucha, Keaton played a breast cancer survivor and matriarch of a big New England family, who reunite at the parents' home for their annual Christmas holidays. The film was released to moderate critical and commercial success, and earned US$92.2million worldwide. Keaton received her second Satellite Award nomination for her portrayal, on which Peter Travers of "Rolling Stone" commented, "Keaton, a sorceress at blending humor and heartbreak, honors the film with a grace that makes it stick in the memory."

In 2007, Keaton starred in both "Because I Said So" and "Mama's Boy". In the romantic comedy "Because I Said So", directed by Michael Lehmann, Keaton played a long-divorced mother of three daughters, determined to pair off her only single daughter, Milly, played by Mandy Moore. Also starring Stephen Collins and Gabriel Macht, the project opened to overwhelmingly negative reviews by critics, with Wesley Morris of "The Boston Globe" calling it "a sloppily made bowl of reheated chick-flick cliches," and was ranked among the worst-reviewed films of the year. The following year, Keaton received her first and only Golden Raspberry Award nomination to date, for the film. In "Mama's Boy", director Tim Hamilton's feature film debut, Keaton starred as the mother of a self-absorbed 29-year-old (played by Jon Heder) whose world turns upside down when his widowed mother starts dating and considers booting him out of the house. Distributed for a limited release to certain parts of the United States only, the independent comedy garnered largely negative reviews.

In 2008, Keaton starred alongside Dax Shepard and Liv Tyler in Vince Di Meglio's dramedy "Smother", playing the overbearing mother of an unemployed therapist, who decides to move in with him and his girlfriend following the split from her husband, played by Ken Howard. As with "Mama's Boy", the film received a limited release only, resulting in a gross of US$1.8million worldwide. Critical reaction to the film was generally unfavorable, and once again Keaton was dismissed for her role choices, with Sandra Hall of the "New York Post" writing, "Diane's career is dyin' [...] this time, sadly, she's gone too far. She's turned herself into a mother-in-law joke." Also in 2008, Keaton appeared alongside Katie Holmes and Queen Latifah in the crime-comedy film "Mad Money", directed by Callie Khouri. Based on the British television drama "Hot Money" (2001), the film revolves around three female employees of the Federal Reserve who scheme to steal money that is about to be destroyed. As with Keaton's previous projects, the film bombed at the box offices with a gross total of US$26.4million, and was universally panned by critics, ranking third in the "New York Post" Top 10 Worst Movies of 2008 overview.

In 2010, Keaton starred alongside Rachel McAdams and Harrison Ford in Roger Michell's comedy "Morning Glory", playing the veteran TV host of a fictional morning talk show that desperately needs to boost its lagging ratings. Portraying a narcissistic character that would do anything to please the audience, Keaton described her role as "the kind of woman you love to hate." Inspired by Neil Simon's 1972 Broadway play "The Sunshine Boys", the film became a moderate success at the box office for a worldwide total of almost US$59million. Though some critics found that Keaton was underused in the film, the actress was generally praised for her performance, with James Berardinelli of "ReelViews" noting that "Diane Keaton is so good at her part that one can see her sliding effortlessly into an anchor's chair on a real morning show."
In fall 2010, Keaton joined the production of the comedy drama "Darling Companion" by Lawrence Kasdan, which was released in 2012. Co-starring Kevin Kline and Dianne Wiest and set in Telluride, Colorado, the film follows a woman, played by Keaton, whose husband loses her much-beloved dog at a wedding held at their vacation home in the Rocky Mountains, resulting in a search party to find the pet. Kasdan's first film in nine years, the film bombed at the US box office, where it scored about US$790,000 throughout its entire theatrical run. Generally negative with the film, critics dismissed the film as "an overwritten, underplotted vanity project," but applauded Keaton's performance. Ty Burr from "The Boston Globe" felt that the film "would be instantly forgettable if not for Keaton, who imbues [her role] with a sorrow, warmth, wisdom, and rage that feel earned [...] Her performance here is an extension of worn, resilient grace."

Also in 2011, Keaton began production on Justin Zackham's 2013 ensemble comedy "The Big Wedding", in which she, along with Robert De Niro, played a long-divorced couple who, for the sake of their adopted son's wedding and his very religious biological mother, pretend they are still married. Upon release, the remake of the original 2006 French film "Mon frère se marie" received largely negative reviews. In his review for "The New York Post", Lou Lumenick stated that "the brutally unfunny, cringe-worthy "The Big Wedding" provides ample opportunities for Robert De Niro, Diane Keaton, Susan Sarandon and Robin Williams to embarrass themselves."

In 2014, Keaton starred in "And So It Goes" and "5 Flights Up". In Rob Reiner's romantic dramedy "And So It Goes", Keaton portrayed a widowed lounge singer, who finds autumnal love with a bad boy, played by Michael Douglas. The film received largely negative reviews from critics, who felt that ""And So It Goes" aims for comedy, but with two talented actors stuck in a half-hearted effort from a once-mighty filmmaker, it ends in unintentional tragedy." Keaton co-starred with Morgan Freeman in Richard Loncraine's comedy film "5 Flights Up". Based on the novel "Heroic Measures" by Jill Ciment, they play a long-married couple who have an eventful weekend after they are forced to contemplate selling their beloved Brooklyn apartment. Shot in New York, the film premiered, under its former name "Ruth & Alex", at the 2014 Toronto International Film Festival. The same year, Keaton became the first woman to receive the Golden Lion Award from the Zurich Film Festival.

Keaton's only film of 2015 was "Love the Coopers", an ensemble comedy about a troubled family getting together for Christmas, for which she reunited with "Because I Said So" writer Jessie Nelson. Also starring John Goodman, Ed Helms, and Marisa Tomei, Keaton was attached for several years before the film went into production. Her cast was instrumental in financing and recruiting most other actors, which led her to an executive producer credit in the film. Upon its release, "Love the Coopers" received largely negative reviews from critics, who called it a "bittersweet blend of holiday cheer," and became a moderate commercial success at a worldwide total of US$41.1million against a budget of US$17million.

Keaton voiced amnesiac fish Dory's mother in Disney and Pixar's "Finding Dory" (2016), the sequel to the 2003 Pixar computer-animated film "Finding Nemo". Upon release, the film was a critical and commercial success, grossing over US$1billion worldwide, becoming the second Pixar film to cross this mark following "Toy Story 3" (2010). It also set numerous records, including the biggest animated opening of all time in North America, emerging as the biggest animated film of all time in the US. Keaton's other project of 2016 was the HBO eight-part series "The Young Pope" opposite Jude Law, in which she plays a nun who raised the newly elected Pope and helped him reach the papacy.

, Keaton has various film projects in different states of production. She is set to appear in Joel Hopkins's "Hampstead", a British romance film also starring Brendan Gleeson, and in the Netflix comedy "Divanation" for which she will reunite with her "First Wives Club" co-stars Midler and Hawn to portray a singing group that reconnects after a volatile split 30 years prior.

Keaton has had several romantic associations with noted entertainment industry personalities, starting with her time with the Broadway production of "Play It Again, Sam" when she auditioned for director Woody Allen. Their association became personal following a dinner after a late-night rehearsal. It was her sense of humor that attracted Allen. They briefly lived together during the Broadway production, but by the time of the film release of the same name in 1972, their living arrangements became informal. They worked together on eight films between 1971 and 1993, and Keaton has said that Allen remains one of her closest friends.

She was already dating Warren Beatty from 1979 when they had co-lead roles in the film "Reds". Beatty was a regular subject in tabloid magazines and media coverage in which she was included much to her bewilderment. Her avoidance of the spotlight earned her in 1985 from "Vanity Fair" the attribution as "the most reclusive star since Garbo." This relationship ended shortly after "Reds" wrapped. Troubles with the production are thought to have caused strain on the relationship, including numerous financial and scheduling problems. Keaton remains friends with Beatty.

Keaton also had a relationship with her "The Godfather Trilogy" costar Al Pacino. Their on-again, off-again relationship ended following the filming of "The Godfather Part III". Keaton said of Pacino, "Al was simply the most entertaining man... To me, that's, that is the most beautiful face. I think Warren was gorgeous, very pretty, but Al's face is like whoa. Killer, killer face."

In July 2001, Keaton revealed her thoughts on being older and unmarried: "I don't think that because I'm not married it's made my life any less. That old maid myth is garbage." Keaton has two adopted children, daughter Dexter (adopted 1996) and son Duke (2001). Her father's death made mortality more apparent to her, and she decided to become a mother at age 50. She later said of having children, "Motherhood has completely changed me. It's just about the most completely humbling experience that I've ever had."

Keaton stated that she produced her 1987 documentary "Heaven" because, "I was always pretty religious as a kid ... I was primarily interested in religion because I wanted to go to heaven." Nevertheless, she has also stated that she considered herself an agnostic.

Keaton is an opponent of plastic surgery. She told "More" magazine in 2004, "I'm stuck in this idea that I need to be authentic ... My face needs to look the way I feel." Keaton is also active in campaigns with the Los Angeles Conservancy to save and restore historic buildings, particularly in the Los Angeles area. Among the buildings she has been active in restoring is the Ennis House in the Hollywood Hills designed by Frank Lloyd Wright. Keaton had also been active in the failed campaign to save the Ambassador Hotel in Los Angeles (a hotel featured in "Reservations"), the location of Robert Kennedy's assassination in 1968.

Since May 2005, she has been a contributing blogger at "The Huffington Post". Since summer 2006, Keaton has been the new face of L'Oréal.

Keaton has served as a producer on films and television series. She produced the Fox series "Pasadena" that was canceled after airing only four episodes in 2001 but later completed its run on cable in 2005. In 2003, she produced the Gus Van Sant drama "Elephant", about a school shooting. On why she produced the film, she said "It really makes me think about my responsibilities as an adult to try and understand what's going on with young people."

Outside of the film industry, Keaton has continued to pursue her interest in photography. As a collector, she told "Vanity Fair" in 1987: "I have amassed a huge library of images– kissing scenes from movies, pictures I like. Visual things are really key for me." She has published several more collections of her own photographs, and has also served as an editor for collections of vintage photography. Works she has edited in the last decade include a book of photographs by paparazzo Ron Galella; an anthology of reproductions of clown paintings; and a collection of photos of California's Spanish-Colonial-style houses.

Keaton has also established herself as a real estate developer. She has resold several mansions in Southern California after renovating and redesigning them. One of her clients is Madonna, who purchased a US$6.5million Beverly Hills mansion from Keaton in 2003. She received the Film Society of Lincoln Center's Gala Tribute in 2007.

Keaton wrote her first memoir, entitled "Then Again", for Random House in November 2011. Much of the autobiography relies on her
mother Dorothy's private journals, in which she writes at one point: "Diane...is a mystery...At times, she's so basic, at others so wise it frightens me." In 2012, Keaton's audiobook recording of Joan Didion's "Slouching Towards Bethlehem" was released at Audible.com. Her performance was nominated for a 2013 Audie Award in the Short Stories/Collections category.







</doc>
