<doc id="2397" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2397" title="Anthony Hopkins">
Anthony Hopkins

Sir Philip Anthony "Tony" Hopkins (born 31 December 1937) is a Welsh film, stage, and television actor. After graduating from the Royal Welsh College of Music & Drama in 1957, he trained at the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art in London, and was then spotted by Laurence Olivier who invited him to join the Royal National Theatre. In 1968, he got his break in film in "The Lion in Winter", playing Richard the Lionheart. In the mid 1970s, Richard Attenborough, who would direct five Hopkins films, called him "the greatest actor of his generation."

Considered to be one of the greatest living actors, Hopkins is well known for his portrayal of Hannibal Lecter in "The Silence of the Lambs", for which he won the Academy Award for Best Actor, its sequel "Hannibal", and the prequel "Red Dragon". Other notable films include "The Mask of Zorro", "The Bounty", "Meet Joe Black", "The Elephant Man", "Magic", "84 Charing Cross Road", "Bram Stoker's Dracula", "Legends of the Fall", "Thor" and its sequels, "The Remains of the Day", "Amistad", "Nixon", "The World's Fastest Indian", "Instinct" and "Fracture". In 2015 he starred in the BBC television film "The Dresser", and since 2016, he has starred in the critically acclaimed HBO television series "Westworld".

Along with his Academy Award, Hopkins has won three BAFTA Awards, two Emmys, and the Cecil B. DeMille Award. In 1993, he was knighted by Queen Elizabeth II for services to the arts. He received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame in 2003, and was made a Fellow of the British Academy of Film and Television Arts in 2008.

Hopkins was born on New Year's Eve 1937, in Margam, a suburb of Port Talbot, Glamorgan. His parents were Annie Muriel ("née" Yeates) and Richard Arthur Hopkins, a baker. He stated his father’s working class values have always underscored his life. “Whenever I get a feeling that I may be special or different, I think of my father and I remember his hands – his hardened, broken hands". His school days were unproductive; he would rather immerse himself in art, such as painting and drawing, or playing the piano, than attend to his studies. In 1949, to instill discipline, his parents insisted he attend Jones' West Monmouth Boys' School in Pontypool. He remained there for five terms and was then educated at Cowbridge Grammar School in the Vale of Glamorgan. In a 2002 interview he stated: "I was a poor learner, which left me open to ridicule and gave me an inferiority complex. I grew up absolutely convinced I was stupid." In desperation, his parents sent him off to boarding school, where the headmaster told him he was "hopeless" and he developed a "sheer contempt for authority." He stumbled into acting at 17 with a YMCA group (his one line: "").

Hopkins was influenced and encouraged by Welsh compatriot Richard Burton, whom he met at the age of 15. Hopkins promptly enrolled at the Royal Welsh College of Music & Drama in Cardiff, from which he graduated in 1957. After two years in the British Army doing his national service, he moved to London where he studied at the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art.

Hopkins made his first professional stage appearance in the Palace Theatre, Swansea, in 1960 with Swansea Little Theatre's production of "Have a Cigarette". In 1965, after several years in repertory, he was spotted by Laurence Olivier, who invited him to join the Royal National Theatre in London. Hopkins became Olivier's understudy, and filled in when Olivier was struck with appendicitis during a 1967 production of August Strindberg's "The Dance of Death". Olivier later noted in his memoir, "Confessions of an Actor", that

Hopkins was nervous prior to going on stage, but since that night he has relaxed, quoting his mentor: "He [Olivier] said: 'Remember: nerves is [sic] vanity – you’re wondering what people think of you; to hell with them, just jump off the edge’. It was great advice.” Despite his success at the National, Hopkins tired of repeating the same roles nightly and yearned to be in films. He made his small-screen debut in a 1967 BBC broadcast of "A Flea in Her Ear". His first starring role in a film came in 1964 in "Changes", a short directed by Drewe Henley, written and produced by James Scott and co-starring Jacqueline Pearce. In 1968, he got his break in "The Lion in Winter" playing King Richard the Lionheart. Although Hopkins continued in theatre (most notably at the National Theatre as Lambert Le Roux in "Pravda" by David Hare and Howard Brenton and as Antony in "Antony and Cleopatra" opposite Judi Dench as well as in the Broadway production of Peter Shaffer's "Equus") he gradually moved away from it to become more established as a television and film actor. He portrayed Charles Dickens in the BBC television film "The Great Inimitable Mr. Dickens" in 1970, and Pierre Bezukhov in the BBC's mini series "War and Peace" (1972). Making a name for himself as a screen actor, in 1972 he starred as British politician David Lloyd George in "Young Winston", and in 1977 he played British Army officer John Frost in the World War II-set film "A Bridge Too Far". Both of these films were directed by Richard Attenborough, who described Hopkins as “unquestionably the greatest actor of his generation”.

In 1980, he starred in "The Elephant Man" as the English doctor Sir Frederick Treves, who attends to Joseph Merrick (portrayed by John Hurt), a severely deformed man in 19th century London. That year he also starred opposite Shirley MacLaine in "A Change of Seasons" and famously said "she was the most obnoxious actress I have ever worked with." In 1983, Hopkins also became a company member of The Mirror Theater Ltd's Repertory Company.
He remained an enthusiastic member of the company and the Mirror’s Producing Artistic Director Sabra Jones visited him in London in 1986 to discuss moving "Pravda" to New York from the National Theatre. In 1984, he starred opposite Mel Gibson in "The Bounty" as William Bligh, captain of the Royal Navy ship the HMS "Bounty", in a retelling of the mutiny on the "Bounty". In 1992, Hopkins portrayed Professor Van Helsing in Francis Ford Coppola's "Bram Stoker's Dracula".
Set in 1950s post-war Britain, Hopkins starred opposite Emma Thompson in the critically acclaimed "The Remains of the Day" (1993), a film the BFI ranked the 64th greatest British film of the 20th century. Hopkins was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Actor for his performance, and he received the BAFTA Award for Best Actor. Hopkins portrayed Oxford academic C. S. Lewis in the 1993 British biographical film "Shadowlands", for which he was nominated for a BAFTA Award for Best Actor. During the 1990s, Hopkins had the chance to work with Bart the Bear in two films: "Legends of the Fall" (1994) and "The Edge" (1997). According to trainer, Lynn Seus, "Tony Hopkins was absolutely brilliant with Bart...He acknowledged and respected him like a fellow actor. He would spend hours just looking at Bart and admiring him. He did so many of his own scenes with Bart."

Hopkins was Britain's highest paid performer in 1998, starring in "The Mask of Zorro" and "Meet Joe Black", and also agreed to reprise his role as Dr Hannibal Lecter for a fee of £15 million. In 2000, Hopkins narrated "Dr. Seuss' How the Grinch Stole Christmas". Hopkins received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame in 2003. Hopkins stated that his role as Burt Munro, whom he portrayed in his 2005 film "The World's Fastest Indian", was his favourite. He also asserted that Munro was the easiest role that he had played because both men have a similar outlook on life. In 2006, Hopkins was the recipient of the Golden Globe Cecil B. DeMille Award for lifetime achievement. In 2008, he received the BAFTA Academy Fellowship Award, the highest award the British Film Academy can bestow.

On 24 February 2010, it was announced that Hopkins had been cast in "The Rite", which was released on 28 January 2011. He played a priest who is "an expert in exorcisms and whose methods are not necessarily traditional". Hopkins, who is quoted as saying "I don't know what I believe, myself personally", reportedly wrote a line--"Some days I don't know if I believe in God or Santa Claus or Tinkerbell"—into his character in order to identify with it. On the other hand, in other sources from the same time, he is quoted as saying that he did believe in God and had done so for decades. On 21 September 2011, Peter R. de Vries named Hopkins in the role of the Heineken owner Freddy Heineken in a future film about his kidnapping.

Hopkins portrayed Odin, the Allfather or "king" of Asgard, in the 2011 film adaptation of Marvel Comics' "Thor". Hopkins portrayed Alfred Hitchcock in Sacha Gervasi's biopic "Hitchcock", following his career while making "Psycho". The film was released on 23 November 2012. In 2013, he reprised his role as Odin in "". In 2014, he portrayed Methuselah in Darren Aronofsky's "Noah". Since October 2016, Hopkins has been starring as Robert Ford in the HBO sci-fi series "Westworld". Hopkins played Autobot ally Sir Edmund Burton in "", which was released in June 2017.

Hopkins' most famous role is as the cannibalistic serial killer Hannibal Lecter in "The Silence of the Lambs", for which he won the Academy Award for Best Actor in 1991, with Jodie Foster as Clarice Starling, who also won for Best Actress. The film won Best Picture, Best Director and Academy Award for Best Adapted Screenplay, and Hopkins also picked up his first BAFTA for Best Actor. Hopkins reprised his role as Lecter twice; in Ridley Scott's "Hannibal" (2001), and "Red Dragon" (2002).

His original portrayal of the character in "The Silence of the Lambs" has been labelled by the AFI as the number-one film villain. At the time he was offered the role, Hopkins was making a return to the London stage, performing in "M. Butterfly". He had come back to Britain after living for a number of years in Hollywood, having all but given up on a career there, saying, "Well that part of my life's over; it's a chapter closed. I suppose I'll just have to settle for being a respectable actor poncing around the West End and doing respectable BBC work for the rest of my life." Hopkins played the iconic villain in adaptations of the first three of the Lecter novels by Thomas Harris. The author was reportedly very pleased with Hopkins' portrayal of his antagonist. However, Hopkins stated that "Red Dragon" would feature his final performance as the character, and that he would not reprise even a narrative role in the latest addition to the series, "Hannibal Rising".

Hopkins is renowned for his preparation for roles. He indicated in interviews that once he has committed to a project, he will go over his lines as many times as is needed (sometimes upwards of 200) until the lines sound natural to him, so that he can "do it without thinking". This leads to an almost casual style of delivery that belies the amount of groundwork done beforehand. While it can allow for some careful improvisation, it has also brought him into conflict with the occasional director who departs from the script, or demands what the actor views as an excessive number of takes. Hopkins has stated that after he is finished with a scene, he simply discards the lines, not remembering them later on. This is unlike others who usually remember their lines from a film, even years later.

Richard Attenborough, who directed Hopkins on five occasions, found himself going to great lengths during the filming of "Shadowlands" (1993) to accommodate the differing approaches of his two stars (Hopkins and Debra Winger), who shared many scenes. Whereas Hopkins, preferring the spontaneity of a fresh take, liked to keep rehearsals to a minimum, Winger rehearsed continuously. To allow for this, Attenborough stood in for Hopkins during Winger's rehearsals, only bringing him in for the last one before a take. The director praised Hopkins for "this extraordinary ability to make you believe when you hear him that it is the very first time he has ever said that line. It's an incredible gift."

Renowned for his ability to remember lines, Hopkins keeps his memory supple by learning things by heart such as poetry, and Shakespeare. In Steven Spielberg's "Amistad", Hopkins astounded the crew with his memorisation of a seven-page courtroom speech, delivering it in one go. An overawed Spielberg couldn't bring himself to call him Tony, and insisted on addressing him as Sir Anthony throughout the shoot.

Hopkins is a gifted mimic, adept at turning his native Welsh accent into whatever is required by a character. He duplicated the voice of his late mentor, Laurence Olivier, for additional scenes in "Spartacus" in its 1991 restoration. His interview on the 1998 relaunch edition of the British TV talk show "Parkinson" featured an impersonation of comedian Tommy Cooper. Hopkins has said acting "like a submarine" has helped him to deliver credible performances in his thrillers. He said, "It's very difficult for an actor to avoid, you want to show a bit. But I think the less one shows the better."

Anthony Hopkins was made a Commander of the Order of the British Empire (CBE) in 1987, and was knighted as a Knight Bachelor at Buckingham Palace in 1993 for services to the arts. In 1988, Hopkins was made an Honorary D.Litt and in 1992 was awarded Honorary fellowship from the University of Wales, Lampeter. He was made a freeman of his home town, Port Talbot, in 1996.

Hopkins resides in Malibu, California. He had moved to the US once before during the late 1970s to pursue his film career, but returned to London in the late 1980s. However, he decided to return to the US following his 1990s success. Retaining his British citizenship, he became a naturalised US citizen on 12 April 2000, with Hopkins stating: "I have dual citizenship; it just so happens I live in America".

Hopkins has been married three times: to Petronella Barker from 1966 to 1972; to Jennifer Lynton from 1973 to 2002; and, since 2003, to Stella Arroyave. On Christmas Eve 2012, he celebrated his 10th wedding anniversary by having a blessing at a private service at St David's Cathedral, Pembrokeshire in the most westerly point of Wales. He has a daughter, actress and singer Abigail Hopkins (born 20 August 1968), from his first marriage.

Hopkins is a recovering alcoholic; he has stayed sober since he stopped drinking just after Christmas 1975. In 2002, he told the New York Times that he woke up in a Phoenix hotel room with no memory of having driven from Los Angeles. "It was two days before his 38th birthday. Still, he continued to spiral downward, at times sitting at home for hours without saying a word. He'd climb in his car and cruise aimlessly for days: once he went on a drive and didn't return for two months. "If there is someone fighting within you, it makes your life unbearable," he said. "Anger has to be converted into something else or it destroys you." He said that a major help in his recovery was his belief in God. He has criticised atheism, saying in 2011 that "being an atheist must be like living in a closed cell with no windows". In an interview with Larry King in 2016, Hopkins described himself as an agnostic and said he believed in a "superior consciousness in all of us". He gave up smoking using the Allen Carr method. In 2008, he embarked on a weight loss program, and by 2010, he had lost 80 pounds.

In January 2017, in an interview with "The Desert Sun", Hopkins reported that he had been diagnosed with Asperger syndrome, but that he was "high end".

Hopkins has offered his support to various charities and appeals, notably becoming President of the National Trust's Snowdonia Appeal, raising funds for the preservation of Snowdonia National Park in north Wales. In 1998 he donated £1 million towards the £3 million needed to aid the Trust's efforts in purchasing parts of Snowdon. Prior to the campaign, Hopkins authored "Anthony Hopkins' Snowdonia", which was published in 1995. Due to his contributions to Snowdonia, in addition to his film career, in 2004 Hopkins was named among the 100 Welsh Heroes in a Welsh poll.

Hopkins has been a patron of the YMCA centre in his home town of Port Talbot, South Wales for more than 20 years, having first joined the YMCA in the 1950s. He supports other various philanthropic groups. He was a Guest of Honour at a Gala Fundraiser for Women in Recovery, Inc., a Venice, California-based non-profit organisation offering rehabilitation assistance to women in recovery from substance abuse. He is also a volunteer teacher at the Ruskin School of Acting in Santa Monica, California. Hopkins served as the Honorary Patron of The New Heritage Theatre Company in Boise, Idaho from 1997-2007, participating in fundraising and marketing efforts for the repertory theatre.

Hopkins contributed toward the refurbishment of a £2.3 million wing at his alma mater, the Royal Welsh College of Music & Drama in Cardiff, named the Anthony Hopkins Centre. It opened in 1999.

Hopkins is a prominent member of environmental protection group Greenpeace and as of early 2008 featured in a television advertisement campaign, voicing concerns about Japan's continuing annual whale hunt. He has also been a patron of RAPt (Rehabilitation for Addicted Prisoners Trust) since its early days and helped open their first intensive drug and alcohol rehabilitation unit at Downview (HM Prison) in 1992.

Hopkins is an admirer of the Welsh comedian Tommy Cooper. On 23 February 2008, as patron of the Tommy Cooper Society, he unveiled a commemorative statue in the entertainer's home town of Caerphilly. For the ceremony, he donned Cooper's trademark fez and performed a comic routine.

In a 2012 interview, Hopkins stated, "I've been composing music all my life and if I'd been clever enough at school I would like to have gone to music college. As it was I had to settle for being an actor." In 1986, he released a single called "Distant Star", which peaked at No. 75 in the UK Singles Chart. In 2007, he announced he would retire temporarily from the screen to tour around the world. Hopkins has also written music for the concert hall, in collaboration with Stephen Barton as orchestrator. These compositions include "The Masque of Time", given its world premiere with the Dallas Symphony Orchestra in October 2008, and "Schizoid Salsa".

In 1990, Hopkins directed a film about his Welsh compatriot, poet Dylan Thomas, titled "Dylan Thomas: Return Journey", which was his directing debut for the screen. In the same year, as part of the restoration process for the Stanley Kubrick film "Spartacus", Hopkins was approached to re-record lines from a scene that was being added back to the film; this scene featured Laurence Olivier and Tony Curtis, with Hopkins recommended by Olivier's widow, Joan Plowright to perform her late husband's part thanks to his talent for mimicry.

In 1996, he directed "August", an adaptation of Chekhov's "Uncle Vanya" set in Wales. His first screenplay, an experimental drama called "Slipstream", which he also directed and scored, premiered at the Sundance Film Festival in 2007. In 1997, Hopkins narrated the BBC natural documentary series, "Killing for a Living", which showed predatory behaviour in nature. He narrated episode 1 through 3 before being replaced by John Shrapnel.

Hopkins is a fan of the BBC sitcom "Only Fools and Horses", and once remarked in an interview how he would love to appear in the series. Writer John Sullivan saw the interview, and with Hopkins in mind created the character Danny Driscoll, a local villain. However, filming of the new series coincided with the filming of "The Silence of the Lambs", making Hopkins unavailable. The role instead went to Roy Marsden.

On 31 October 2011, André Rieu released an album including a waltz which Hopkins had composed in 1964, at the age of 26. Hopkins had never heard his composition, "And the Waltz Goes On", before it was premiered by Rieu's orchestra in Vienna; Rieu's album was given the same name as Hopkins' piece.

In January 2012, Hopkins released an album of classical music, entitled "Composer", performed by the City of Birmingham Symphony Orchestra, and released on CD via the UK radio station Classic FM. The album consists of nine of his original works and film scores, with one of the pieces titled "Margam" in tribute to his home town near Port Talbot in Wales.

In October 2015, Hopkins appeared as Sir in a BBC Two production of Ronald Harwood's "The Dresser", alongside Ian McKellen, Edward Fox and Emily Watson. "The Dresser" is set in a London theatre during the Blitz, where an aging actor-manager, Sir, prepares for his starring role in "King Lear" with the help of his devoted dresser, Norman. Hopkins described his role as Sir as “the highlight of my life”. “It was a chance to work with the actors I had run away from. To play another actor is fun because you know the ins and outs of their thinking – especially with someone like Sir, who is a diabolically insecure, egotistical man."



</doc>
<doc id="56439" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56439" title="Jeff Bridges">
Jeff Bridges

Jeffrey Leon Bridges (born December 4, 1949) is an American actor, singer, and producer. He comes from a prominent acting family and appeared on the television series "Sea Hunt" (1958–60) with his father Lloyd Bridges and brother Beau Bridges. He won the Academy Award for Best Actor for the 2009 film "Crazy Heart" and earned Academy Award nominations for his roles in six other films.

Jeffrey Leon Bridges was born on December 4, 1949 in Los Angeles, California. He is the son of actor Lloyd Bridges (1913–1998) and actress and writer Dorothy Bridges (née Simpson; 1915–2009). His older brother Beau Bridges is also an actor. He has a younger sister Lucinda, and had another brother named Garrett who died of sudden infant death syndrome in 1948. His maternal grandfather was an immigrant from Liverpool.

Bridges and his siblings were raised in the Holmby Hills section of Los Angeles. He shared a close relationship with his brother Beau, who acted as a surrogate father when their father was working. He graduated from University High School in 1967. At age 17, he toured with his father in a stage production of "Anniversary Waltz", then moved to New York City where he studied acting at the Herbert Berghof Studio. He also served seven years in the United States Coast Guard Reserve.

Bridges made his first screen appearance at the age of almost two years in "The Company She Keeps" in 1951. In his youth, Bridges and brother Beau made occasional appearances on their father's show "Sea Hunt" (1958–1961) and the CBS anthology series, "The Lloyd Bridges Show" (1962–1963). In 1969, he played Cal Baker, a Jobs Corps crew member, in the TV series "Lassie" episode "Success Story". In 1971, he played the lead role Mike in the TV movie "In Search of America". His first major role came in the 1971 film "The Last Picture Show", for which he garnered a nomination for the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor. He co-starred in the 1972 critically acclaimed neo-noir boxing film "Fat City", directed by John Huston. He was nominated again for Best Supporting Actor for his performance opposite Clint Eastwood in the 1974 film "Thunderbolt and Lightfoot". In 1976, he starred as the protagonist Jack Prescott in the first remake of "King Kong", opposite Jessica Lange. This film was a commercial success, earning $90 million worldwide, more than triple its $23 million budget, and also winning an Academy Award for special effects.

One of his better-known roles was in the 1982 science fiction film "Tron", in which he played Kevin Flynn, a video game programmer (a role he reprised in late 2010 with the sequel ""). The same year (1982), he also starred in "Kiss Me Goodbye", an American romantic comedy film directed by Robert Mulligan that also starred Sally Field. He was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Actor in 1984, for playing the alien in "Starman". He was also acclaimed for his roles in the thriller "Against All Odds" (1984) and the crime drama "Jagged Edge" (1985). His role in "Fearless" (1993) is thought by some critics to be one of his best performances. One critic dubbed it a masterpiece; Pauline Kael wrote that he "may be the most natural and least self-conscious screen actor that has ever lived." In 1994, he starred as Lt. Jimmy Dove in the action film "Blown Away", opposite Tommy Lee Jones and Forest Whitaker. His real life father Lloyd Bridges also featured in the film, playing the uncle of Bridges' character. The film managed to recoup $30 million of its $50 million budget at the box office. It was up against another explosive-themed film, Speed, which had been released a few weeks before Bridges' film. On July 11, 1994, Bridges received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame for his contributions to the motion picture industry. The star is located at 7065 Hollywood Boulevard. In 1998, he starred as what is arguably his most famous role, The Dude, in the Coen brothers' film "The Big Lebowski".

In 2000, he received his fourth Academy Award nomination, for his role in "The Contender". He also starred in the 2005 Terry Gilliam film "Tideland", his second with the director (the first being 1991's "The Fisher King"). He shaved his trademark mane of hair to play the role of Obadiah Stane in the 2008 Marvel comic book adaptation "Iron Man". In July 2008, at the San Diego Comic-Con International, he appeared in a teaser for "", shot as concept footage for director Joseph Kosinski; this developed into a full 3D feature release in 2010.

Bridges is one of the youngest actors ever to be nominated for an Academy Award (1972, age 22, Best Supporting Actor, "The Last Picture Show"), and one of the oldest ever to win (2010, age 60, Best Actor, "Crazy Heart"). "Crazy Heart" also won him the Golden Globe for Best Actor in a Drama, and the Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Male Actor in a Leading Role.

Bridges received his sixth Academy Award nomination for his role in "True Grit", a collaboration with the Coen brothers in which he starred alongside Matt Damon, Josh Brolin, Barry Pepper, and Hailee Steinfeld. Both the film and Bridges' performance as Rooster Cogburn, were critically praised. Bridges lost to Colin Firth, whom he had beaten for the Oscar in the same category the previous year.

Referring to his career as an actor and his passion for music, Bridges says, "I dug what an actor did, but it took me a while to feel it, to truly appreciate the craft and the preparation. Plus, I was still playing music a lot, and I guess I had a hard time choosing: was I an actor or a musician, or could I be both?"

Bridges studied piano at a young age, strongly encouraged by his mother. While working on the 1980 film "Heaven's Gate", he often played guitar with his co-star, singer-songwriter Kris Kristofferson, between takes. His character in "Crazy Heart", Bad Blake, was later based partly on Kristofferson. He released his debut album "Be Here Soon" on January 1, 2000. In 2005, Bridges, known as "The Dude" in the film "The Big Lebowski", showed up at a Lebowski Fest in Los Angeles singing and playing the film's theme song written by Bob Dylan, "Man in Me".

On January 15, 2010, Bridges performed the song "I Don't Know" from "Crazy Heart" on "The Tonight Show with Conan O'Brien". In the film "The Contender", in which he co-starred, Bridges recorded a version of Johnny Cash's standard "Ring of Fire" with Kim Carnes that played over the pivotal opening credits. In February 2010, he was among the nearly 80 musicians to sing on the charity-single remake of "We Are the World". On October 24, 2010, Bridges appeared at Neil Young's annual "Bridge School Benefit" concert and played a set with singer-songwriter Neko Case.

On April 19, 2011, Country Music Television announced that Bridges had signed a recording contract with Blue Note Records/EMI Music Group. He worked with producer T-Bone Burnett and released his second album, "Jeff Bridges," on August 16, 2011. On November 5, 2011, Bridges played Austin City Limits in support of this album.

In 2015, Bridges released an ambient/spoken-word album entitled "Sleeping Tapes". All proceeds from the album go directly to Bridges' charity No Kid Hungry.

Bridges plays many guitars, including the Gretsch Chet Atkins Country Gentlemen Model G6122-1959.

In 2013, Bridges authored "The Dude and the Zen Master" with Bernie Glassman. Bridges found himself at a party with Glassman and Ram Dass and their conversation led to discussing the parallels between "The Dude" from "The Big Lebowski" and Zen Buddhism. The book was formed from what has been described as a "transcript of a five-day "hang" on a Montana ranch."

Bridges has been an amateur photographer since high school and began taking photographs on film sets during "Starman", at the suggestion of co-star Karen Allen. Since 1980, he began photographing on and off set shots with his favorite camera, a Widelux F8. He published many of these photographs online and published a book in 2003 entitled, "Pictures: Photographs by Jeff Bridges".

Bridges narrated the documentary "Lost in La Mancha" (2002), about the making of a Terry Gilliam retelling of "Don Quixote", tentatively titled "The Man Who Killed Don Quixote", which would have starred Johnny Depp as Sancho Panza and Jean Rochefort as the quixotic hero. Bridges had previously appeared in Gilliam's "The Fisher King". Bridges also narrated the documentaries National Geographic's "Lewis & Clark: Great Journey West" (2002, IMAX), Discovery Channel's "Raising the Mammoth" (2000), and ABC's "Heroes of Rock and Roll" (1979). He voiced the character Big Z in the animated picture "Surf's Up". He also hosted VH1's "Top 100 Greatest Albums of Rock and Roll" series in 2001.
Bridges has performed TV commercial voiceover work as well, including Hyundai's 2007 "Think About It" advertising campaign as well as the Duracell advertisements in the "Trusted Everywhere" campaign.

On December 18, 2010, Bridges hosted NBC's "Saturday Night Live"; he had hosted the show before in 1983 with his brother, Beau. With the December 18, 2010, episode, Bridges beat Sigourney Weaver's record for longest gap between hosting appearances on "SNL" (Weaver had a 24-year gap between her first time hosting in 1986 and her second time hosting in 2010 while Bridges had a 27-year gap between his first appearance in 1983 and his most recent one, also in 2010).

Bridges married Susan Geston in 1977. They met while filming "Rancho Deluxe", on a ranch where Geston was working as a waitress. They have three daughters: Isabelle Annie (born August 6, 1981), Jessica Lily "Jessie" (born June 14, 1983), Hayley Roselouise (born October 17, 1985), and granddaughter Grace (born March 31, 2011) from Isabelle.

Bridges has studied Buddhism. He meditates for half an hour before beginning work on a film set. He has learned Transcendental Meditation.

In 1984, Bridges and other entertainment industry leaders founded the End Hunger Network aimed at encouraging, stimulating and supporting action to end childhood hunger. He supported President Obama's initiative to End Childhood Hunger by 2015. In November 2010, Bridges became spokesman for the No Kid Hungry campaign of the organization Share our Strength. Its goal is to present and undertake a state-by-state strategy to end childhood hunger in the United States by 2015. Bridges also supports environmental causes and organizations such as the Amazon Conservation Team.




</doc>
<doc id="18617829" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18617829" title="Jack Nicholson">
Jack Nicholson

John Joseph Nicholson (born April 22, 1937) is an American actor and filmmaker who has performed for more than 60 years. Nicholson is known for playing a wide range of starring or supporting roles, including satirical comedy, romance and dark portrayals of antiheroes and psychopathic characters. In many of his films, he has played the "eternal outsider, the sardonic drifter", someone who rebels against the social structure.

Nicholson's 12 Academy Award nominations make him the most nominated male actor in the Academy's history. Nicholson has won the Academy Award for Best Actor twice, one for the drama "One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest" (1975) and the other for the romantic comedy "As Good as It Gets" (1997). He also won the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor for the comedy-drama "Terms of Endearment" (1983). Nicholson is one of three male actors to win three Academy Awards.

Nicholson is one of only two actors to be nominated for an Academy Award for acting in every decade from the 1960s to the 2000s; the other is Michael Caine. He has won six Golden Globe Awards, and received the Kennedy Center Honor in 2001. In 1994, he became one of the youngest actors to be awarded the American Film Institute's Life Achievement Award.

Jack Nicholson was born on April 22, 1937, in Neptune City, New Jersey, the son of a showgirl, June Frances Nicholson (November 5, 1918 – July 31, 1963) (stage name June Nilson). Nicholson's mother was of Irish, English, and German descent. She married Italian-American showman Donald Furcillo (stage name Donald Rose) in 1936, before realizing that he was already married. Biographer Patrick McGilligan stated in his book "Jack's Life" that Latvian-born Eddie King (originally Edgar A. Kirschfeld), June's manager, may have been Nicholson's biological father, rather than Furcillo. Other sources suggest June Nicholson was unsure of who the father was. As June was only 18 years old and unmarried, her parents agreed to raise Nicholson as their own child without revealing his true parentage, and June would act as his sister.

In 1974, "Time" magazine researchers learned, and informed Nicholson, that his "sister," June, was actually his mother, and his other "sister," Lorraine, was really his aunt. By this time, both his mother and grandmother had died (in 1963 and 1970, respectively). On finding out, Nicholson said it was "a pretty dramatic event, but it wasn't what I'd call traumatizing...I was pretty well psychologically formed."

Nicholson grew up in Neptune City, New Jersey. He was raised in his mother's Roman Catholic religion. Before starting high school, his family moved to an apartment in Spring Lake, New Jersey. "When Jack was ready for high school, the family moved once more—this time two miles (3 km) farther south to old-money Spring Lake, New Jersey's so-called Irish Riviera, where Ethel May set up her beauty parlor in a rambling duplex at 505 Mercer Avenue." "Nick", as he was known to his high school friends, attended nearby Manasquan High School, where he was voted "class clown" by the Class of 1954. He was in detention every day for a whole school year. A theatre and a drama award at the school are named in his honor. In 2004, Nicholson attended his 50-year high school reunion accompanied by his aunt Lorraine.

In 1957 Nicholson joined the Air National Guard, a move he sometimes characterized as an effort to "dodge the draft"; the Korean War-era's Military Selective Service Act was still in force, and draftees were required to perform up to two years of active duty. After completing the Air Force's basic training at Lackland Air Force Base, Nicholson performed weekend drills and two-week annual training as a fire fighter assigned to the unit based at the Van Nuys Airport. During the Berlin Crisis of 1961, Nicholson was called up for several months of extended active duty, and he was discharged at the end of his enlistment in 1962.

Nicholson first came to Hollywood in 1954, when he was 17, to visit his sister (i.e. his biological mother). He took a job as an office worker for animators William Hanna and Joseph Barbera at the MGM cartoon studio. They offered him a starting-level job as an animator, but he declined, citing his desire to become an actor.

He trained to be an actor with a group called the Players Ring Theater, after which time he found small parts performing on the stage and in TV soap operas. He made his film debut in a low-budget teen drama "The Cry Baby Killer" (1958), playing the title role. For the following decade, Nicholson was a frequent collaborator with the film's producer, Roger Corman. Corman directed Nicholson on several occasions, most notably in "The Little Shop of Horrors", as masochistic dental patient and undertaker Wilbur Force, and also in "The Raven", "The Terror" where he plays a French officer seduced by an evil ghost, and "The St. Valentine's Day Massacre".

Nicholson also frequently worked with director Monte Hellman on low-budget westerns, though two in particular, "Ride in the Whirlwind" and "The Shooting", initially failed to find interest from any US film distributors but gained cult success on the art-house circuit in France and were later sold to television. Nicholson also appeared in two episodes of "The Andy Griffith Show".

With his acting career heading nowhere, Nicholson seemed resigned to a career behind the camera as a writer/director. His first real taste of writing success was the screenplay for the 1967 counterculture film "The Trip" (directed by Corman), which starred Peter Fonda and Dennis Hopper. After first reading the script, Fonda told Nicholson he was totally impressed by the writing and felt it could become a great film. However, he was disappointed with how the film turned out, and blamed the editing which turned it into a "predictable" film, and said so publicly. "I was livid", he recalls. Nicholson also co-wrote, with Bob Rafelson, the movie "Head", which starred The Monkees. He also arranged the movie's soundtrack.

After a spot opened up in Fonda and Hopper's "Easy Rider" (1969), it led to his first big acting break. Nicholson played hard-drinking lawyer George Hanson, for which he received his first Oscar nomination. The film cost only $400,000 to make and became a blockbuster, grossing $40 million. Biographer John Parker states that Nicholson's interpretation of his role placed him in the company of earlier "anti-hero" actors, such as James Cagney and Humphrey Bogart, while promoting him into an "overnight number-one hero of the counter-culture movement".

The part was a lucky break for Nicholson—the role had been written for actor Rip Torn, who withdrew from the project after an argument with Hopper. In interview, Nicholson later acknowledged the importance of being cast in "Easy Rider": "All I could see in the early films, before "Easy Rider", was this desperate young actor trying to vault out of the screen and create a movie career."

Nicholson was cast by Stanley Kubrick, who was impressed with his role in "Easy Rider", in the part of Napoleon in a film about his life, and although production on the film commenced, the project fizzled out, partly due to a change in ownership at MGM and other issues.

Nicholson starred in "Five Easy Pieces" alongside Karen Black in 1970 in what became his persona-defining role. Nicholson and Black were nominated for Academy Awards for their performances. Nicholson played Bobby Dupea, an oil rig worker, and Black was his waitress girlfriend. During an interview about the film, Black noted that Nicholson's character in the film was very subdued, and was very different than Nicholson's real-life personality. She says that the now famous restaurant scene was partly improvised by Nicholson, and was out of character for Bobby, who wouldn't have cared enough to argue with a waitress. "I think that Jack really has very little in common with Bobby. I think Bobby has given up looking for love. But Jack hasn't, he's very interested in love, in finding out things. Jack is a very curious, alive human being. Always ready for a new idea." Nicholson himself said as much, telling an interviewer, "I like listening to everybody. This to me is the elixir of life."

Black later admitted that she had a crush on Nicholson from the time they met, although they only dated briefly. "He was very beautiful. He just looked right at you ... I liked him a lot ... He really sort of wanted to date me but I didn't think of him that way because I was going with Peter Kastner ... Then I went to do "Easy Rider", but didn't see him because we didn't have any scenes together ... At the premiere, I saw him out in the lobby afterward and I started crying ... He didn't understand that, but what it was that I really loved him a lot, and I didn't know it until I saw him again, because it all welled up."

Within a month after the film's release that September, the movie became a blockbuster, making Nicholson a leading man and the "new American antihero", according to McDougal. Critics began speculating whether he might become another Marlon Brando or James Dean. His career and income skyrocketed. He said, "I was much sought after. Your name becomes a brand image like a product. You become Campbell's soup, with thirty-one different varieties of roles you can play." He told his new agent, Sandy Bresler, to find him unusual roles so he could stretch his acting skill: "I like to play people that haven't existed yet, a 'cusp character'", he said:

Also in 1970, he appeared in the movie adaptation of "On A Clear Day You Can See Forever", although most of his performance was left on the cutting room floor. His agent turned down a starring role in "Deliverance" when the film's producer and director, John Boorman refused to pay what Nicholson's agent wanted.

Nicholson starred in "Carnal Knowledge" in 1971, a comedy-drama directed by Mike Nichols, which co-starred Art Garfunkel, Ann-Margret and Candice Bergen. He was nominated for a Golden Globe Award for Best Actor. As director, Mike Nichols was limited in the actors who he felt could handle the role, saying, "There is James Cagney, Spencer Tracy, Humphrey Bogart and Henry Fonda. After that, who is there but Jack Nicholson?" During the filming Nicholson struck up what became a lifelong friendship with costar Garfunkel. When he visited Los Angeles, Garfunkel would stay at Nicholson's home in a room Nicholson jokingly called "the Arthur Garfunkel Suite."

Other Nicholson roles included Hal Ashby's "The Last Detail" (1973), with Randy Quaid, for which Nicholson won for Best Actor at the Cannes Film Festival and he was nominated for his third Oscar and a Golden Globe. Television journalist David Gilmour writes that one of his favorite Nicholson scenes from all his films was in this one, when Nicholson slaps his gun on the bar yelling he "was" the Shore Patrol. Critic Roger Ebert called it a very good movie, but credited Nicholson's acting as the main reason: "He creates a character so complete and so complex that we stop thinking about the movie and just watch to see what he'll do next."

In 1974, he starred in Roman Polanski's noir thriller, "Chinatown", and was again nominated for Academy Award for Best Actor for his role as Jake Gittes, a private detective. The film co-starred Faye Dunaway and John Huston, and included a cameo role with Polanski. Roger Ebert described Nicholson's portrayal as sharp-edged, menacing, and aggressive, a character who knew "how to go over the top", as he did in "One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest". It is that edge that kept "Chinatown" from becoming a typical genre crime film. Ebert also notes the importance of the role for Nicholson's career, seeing it as a major transition from the exploitation films of the previous decade. "As Jake Gittes he stepped into Bogart's shoes," says Ebert. "As a man attractive to audiences because he suggests both comfort and danger ... From Gittes forward, Nicholson created the persona of a man who had seen it all and was still capable of being wickedly amused."
Nicholson had been friends with the director Roman Polanski long before the murder of Polanski's wife, Sharon Tate, at the hands of the Manson Family, and supported him in the days following the deaths. After Tate's death, Nicholson began sleeping with a hammer under his pillow, and took breaks from work to attend the Manson trial.

In 1977, three years after "Chinatown," Polanski was arrested at Nicholson's home for the sexual assault of 13-year-old Samantha Geimer, who was modeling for Polanski during a magazine photo shoot around the pool. At the time of the incident, Nicholson was out of town making a film, but his steady girlfriend, actress Anjelica Huston, had dropped by unannounced to pick up some items. She heard Polanski in the other room say, "We'll be right out." Polanski then came out with Geimer and he introduced her to Huston, and they chatted about Nicholson's two large dogs which were sitting nearby. Huston recalled Geimer was wearing platform heels and appeared quite tall. After a few minutes of talking, Polanski had packed up his camera gear and Huston saw them drive off in his car. Huston told police the next day, after Polanski was arrested, that she "had witnessed nothing untoward" and never saw them together in the other room.

Geimer learned afterwards that Huston herself wasn't supposed to be at Nicholson's house that day since they had recently broken up, but stopped over to pick up some belongings. Geimer described Nicholson's house as "definitely" a guy's house, with lots of wood and shelves crowded with photos and mementos.

One of Nicholson's greatest successes came in 1975 with his role as Randle P. McMurphy in "One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest". The movie was an adaptation of Ken Kesey's novel and was directed by Miloš Forman and co-produced by Michael Douglas. Nicholson plays an anti-authoritarian patient at a mental hospital where he becomes an inspiring leader for the other patients. Playing one of the patients was Danny DeVito in an early role. Nicholson learned afterwards that DeVito grew up in the same area of New Jersey and they knew many of the same people. The film swept the Academy Awards with nine nominations and won the top five, including Nicholson's first for Best Actor.

The role seemed perfect for Nicholson, with biographer Ken Burke noting that his "smartass demeanor balances his genuine concern for the treatment of his fellow patients with his independent spirit too free to exist in a repressive social structure." Forman allowed Nicholson to improvise throughout the film, including most of the group therapy sequences. Reviewer Marie Brenner notes that his bravura performance "transcends the screen" and continually inspires the other actors by lightening their mental illnesses with his comic dialogue. She describes his performance:

Also in 1975, Nicholson starred in Michelangelo Antonioni's "The Passenger" (1975), which co-starred Maria Schneider. Nicholson plays the role of a journalist, David Locke, who during an assignment in North Africa decides to quit being a journalist and simply disappear by taking on a new hidden identity. Unfortunately, the dead person whose identity he takes on turns out to have been a weapons smuggler on the run. Antonioni's unusual plot included convincing dialogue and fine acting, states film critic Seymour Chatman. It was shot in Algeria, Spain, Germany and England.

The film received good reviews and revived Antonioni's reputation as one of cinema's great directors. He says he wanted the film to have more of a "spy feeling [and] be more political." Nicholson began shooting the film from an unfinished script, notes Judith Crist, yet upon its completion he thought so highly of the film that he bought the world rights and recorded a reminiscence of working with Antonioni. Critic and screenwriter Penelope Gilliatt provides an overview of Nicholson's role:
He continued to take more unusual roles. He took a small role in "The Last Tycoon", opposite Robert De Niro. He took a less sympathetic role in Arthur Penn's western "The Missouri Breaks" (1976), specifically to work with Marlon Brando. Nicholson was especially inspired by Brando's acting ability, recalling that in his youth, as an assistant manager at a theater, he watched "On the Waterfront" about forty times. "I'm part of the first generation that idolized Marlon Brando," he said.
Nicholson has observed that while both De Niro and Brando were noted for their skill as method actors, he himself has seldom been described as a method actor, a fact which he sees as an accomplishment: "I'm still fooling them," he told Sean Penn during a phone conversation. "I consider it an accomplishment because there's probably no one who understands Method acting better academically than I do—or actually uses it more in his work. But it's funny, nobody really sees that. It's perception versus reality, I guess."

Although he garnered no Academy Award for Stanley Kubrick's adaptation of Stephen King's "The Shining" (1980), it remains one of his more significant roles. He was Kubrick's first choice to play the lead role, although the book's author, Stephen King, wanted the part played by more of an "everyman." However, Kubrick as director won the argument, and described Nicholson's acting quality as being "on a par with the greatest stars of the past, like Spencer Tracy and Jimmy Cagney."

On the set, Nicholson always appeared in character, and if Kubrick felt confident that he knew his lines well enough, he encouraged him to improvise and go beyond the script. For example, Nicholson improvised his now famous "Here's Johnny!" line, along with the scene in which he's sitting at the typewriter and unleashes his anger upon his wife after she discovers he has gone insane when she looks at his writing ("all work and no play makes Jack a dull boy" typed endlessly). There were also extensive takes of scenes, due to Kubrick's perfectionism. Nicholson shot a scene with the ghostly bartender thirty-six times. Nicholson states that "Stanley's demanding. He'll do a scene fifty times and you have to be good to do that."

In 1982 he starred as in immigration enforcement agent in "The Border", directed by Tony Richardson. It co-starred Warren Oates who played a corrupt border official. Richardson wanted Nicholson to play his role less expressively than he had in his earlier roles. "Less is more," he told him, and wanted him to wear reflecting sunglasses to portray what patrolmen wore. Richardson recalled that Nicholson worked hard on the set:
Nicholson won his second Oscar, an Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor, for his role of retired astronaut Garrett Breedlove in "Terms of Endearment" (1983), directed by James L. Brooks. It starred Shirley MacLaine and Debra Winger. McGilligan claims it was one of Nicholson's most complex and unforgettable characters. He and MacLaine played many of their scenes in different ways, constantly testing and making adjustments. Their scenes together gave the film its "buoyant edge," states McGilligan, and describes Nicholson's acting as "Jack floating like a butterfly."

Nicholson continued to work prolifically in the 1980s, starring in such films as "The Postman Always Rings Twice" (1981), "Reds" (1981), where Nicholson portrays the writer Eugene O'Neill with a quiet intensity, "Prizzi's Honor" (1985), "The Witches of Eastwick" (1987), "Broadcast News" (1987), and "Ironweed" (1987). Three Oscar nominations also followed ("Reds", "Prizzi's Honor", and "Ironweed"). John Huston, who directed "Prizzi's Honor", said of Nicholson's acting, "He just illuminates the book. He impressed me in one scene after another; the movie is composed largely of first takes with him."

In the 1989 "Batman" movie, Nicholson played the psychotic murderer and villain, The Joker. The film was an international smash hit, and a lucrative percentage deal earned him a percentage of the box office gross estimated at $60 million to $90 million. Nicholson said that he was "particularly proud" of his performance as the Joker: "I considered it a piece of pop art," he said.

For his role as hot-headed Col. Nathan R. Jessup in "A Few Good Men" (1992), a movie about a murder in a U.S. Marine Corps unit, Nicholson received yet another Academy Award nomination for Best Supporting Actor. One review describes his performance as "spellbinding," adding that he portrayed "the essence of the quintessential military mind-set." Critic David Thomson notes that Nicholson's character "blazed and roared."

The film's director, Rob Reiner, recalls how Nicholson's level of acting experience affected the other actors during rehearsals: "I had the luck of having Jack Nicholson there. He knows what he's doing, and he comes to play, every time out, full-out performance! And what it says to a lot of the other actors is, 'Oooooh, I better get on my game here because this guy's coming to play! So I can't hold back; I've got to come up to him.' He sets the tone."

In 1996, Nicholson collaborated once more with "Batman" director Tim Burton on "Mars Attacks!", pulling double duty as two contrasting characters, President James Dale and Las Vegas property developer Art Land. At first studio executives at Warner Bros. disliked the idea of killing off Nicholson's character, so Burton created two characters and killed them both off.

Not all of Nicholson's performances have been well received. He was nominated for Razzie Awards as worst actor for "Man Trouble" (1992) and "Hoffa" (1992). However, Nicholson's performance in "Hoffa" also earned him a Golden Globe nomination. While David Thomson states that the film was terribly neglected, since Nicholson portrayed one of his best screen characters, someone who is "snarly, dumb, smart, noble, rascally—all the parts of 'Jack'"

Nicholson went on to win his next Academy Award for Best Actor in the romantic comedy, "As Good as It Gets" (1997), his third film directed by James L. Brooks. He played Melvin Udall, a "wickedly funny," mean-spirited, obsessive-compulsive novelist. "I'm a studio Method actor," he said. "So I was prone to give some kind of clinical presentation of the disorder." His Oscar was matched with the Academy Award for Best Actress for Helen Hunt, who played a Manhattan wisecracking, single-mother waitress drawn into a love/hate friendship with Udall, a frequent diner in the restaurant. The film was a tremendous box office success, grossing $314 million, which made it Nicholson's second-best-grossing film of his career, after "Batman".

Nicholson admits he initially didn't like playing the role of a middle-aged man alongside much younger Hunt, seeing it as a movie cliché. "But Helen disarmed that at the first meeting," he says, "and I stopped thinking about it." They got along well during the filming, with Hunt saying that he "treated me like a queen," and they connected immediately: "It wasn't even what we said," she adds. "It was just some frequency we both could tune into that was very, very compatible."

Critic Jack Mathews of "Newsday" described Nicholson as being "in rare form," adding that "it's one of those performances that make you aware how much fun the actor is having." Author and screenwriter Andrew Horton describes their on-screen relationship as being like "fire and ice, oil and water— seemingly complete opposites." Nonetheless, Hunt was Nicholson's perfect counterpart, and delivered "a simply stunning performance," writes critic Louise Keller. Co-star Greg Kinnear's role was also seen as showing his full range of acting in an "exquisitely heartfelt performance."

In 2001, Nicholson was the first actor to receive the Stanislavsky Award at the 23rd Moscow International Film Festival for "conquering the heights of acting and faithfulness".

In "About Schmidt" (2002), Nicholson portrayed a retired Omaha, Nebraska, actuary who questions his own life following his wife's death. His quietly restrained performance earned him an Academy Award Nomination for Best Actor. In "Anger Management" (2003), he played an aggressive therapist assigned to help an overly pacifist man (Adam Sandler). In 2003, Nicholson also starred in "Something's Gotta Give", as an aging playboy who falls for the mother (Diane Keaton) of his young girlfriend. In late 2006, Nicholson marked his return to the dark side as Frank Costello, a sadistic Boston Irish Mob boss, based on Whitey Bulger who was still on the run at that time, presiding over Matt Damon and Leonardo DiCaprio in Martin Scorsese's Oscar-winning film "The Departed", a remake of Andrew Lau's "Infernal Affairs". The role earned Nicholson worldwide critical praise along with various award wins and nominations including a Golden Globe nomination for supporting actor.

In 2007 Nicholson co-starred with Morgan Freeman in Rob Reiner's "The Bucket List". Nicholson and Freeman portrayed dying men who fulfill their list of goals. In researching the role, Nicholson visited a Los Angeles hospital to see how cancer patients coped with their illnesses.

Nicholson's last film role to date saw him reunite with "Terms of Endearment", "Broadcast News" and "As Good as It Gets" director, James L. Brooks, for a supporting role as Paul Rudd's character's father in the 2010 film "How Do You Know". It had been widely reported in subsequent years that Nicholson had retired from acting because of memory loss but in a September 2013 "Vanity Fair" article, Nicholson clarified that he did not consider himself retired, merely that he was now less driven to "be out there any more".

On February 15, 2015, Nicholson made a special appearance as a presenter on "SNL 40", the 40th anniversary special of "Saturday Night Live".
After the death of boxer Muhammad Ali on June 3, 2016, Nicholson appeared on HBO's "The Fight Game with Jim Lampley" for an exclusive interview about his friendship with Ali.

In February 2017, it was reported that Nicholson would be starring in an English-language remake of "Toni Erdmann" opposite Kristen Wiig. It will be his first feature film role since 2010.

Nicholson's only marriage was to Sandra Knight from June 17, 1962, to August 8, 1968; they had been separated for two years prior to the divorce. They had one daughter together, Jennifer (born September 16, 1963). Actress Susan Anspach contends that her son, Caleb Goddard (born September 26, 1970), was fathered by Nicholson, though he is not convinced he is the father. Between April 1973 and January 1990, Nicholson had an on-again, off-again relationship with actress Anjelica Huston that included periods of overlap with other women, including Danish model Winnie Hollman, by whom he fathered a daughter, Honey Hollman (born 1981).

From 1989 to 1994, Nicholson had a relationship with actress Rebecca Broussard. They had two children together: daughter Lorraine (born April 16, 1990) and son Raymond (born February 20, 1992). 

For over a year from 1999 to 2000, Nicholson dated actress Lara Flynn Boyle; they later reunited before splitting permanently in 2004.

Nicholson states that children added to the quality of his life: "Children give your life a resonance that it can't have without them ... As a father I'm there all the time. I give unconditional love. And I have a lot of skills in terms of getting them to express themselves."

In a criminal lawsuit filed on February 8, 1994, Robert Blank stated that Nicholson, then 56, approached Blank's Mercedes-Benz while he was stopped at a red light in North Hollywood. After accusing the other man of cutting him off in traffic, Nicholson used a golf club to bash the roof and windshield of Blank's car. A witness confirmed Blank's account of the incident, and misdemeanor charges of assault and vandalism were filed against Nicholson. Charges were dropped after Nicholson apologized to Blank and the two reached an undisclosed settlement, which included a reported $500,000 check from Nicholson.

Nicholson lived next door to Marlon Brando for a number of years on Mulholland Drive in Beverly Hills. Warren Beatty also lived nearby, earning the road the nickname "Bad Boy Drive". After Brando's death in 2004, Nicholson purchased his bungalow for $6.1 million, with the purpose of having it demolished. Nicholson stated that it was done out of respect to Brando's legacy, as it had become too expensive to renovate the "derelict" building which was plagued by mold.

Nicholson's friendship with author-journalist Hunter S. Thompson is described in Thompson's autobiography "Kingdom of Fear". Following Thompson's death in 2005, Nicholson and fellow actors Johnny Depp, John Cusack, and Sean Penn attended the private memorial service in Colorado.

Nicholson was also a close friend of Robert Evans, the producer of "Chinatown", and after Evans lost Woodland, his home, as the result of a 1980s drug bust, Nicholson and other friends of the producer purchased Woodland to give it back to Evans.

Nicholson is a fan of the New York Yankees and Los Angeles Lakers. He has been a Laker season ticket holder since 1970 and has held courtside season tickets for the past 25 years next to the opponent's benches both at The Forum and Staples Center, missing very few games. In a few instances, Nicholson has engaged in arguments with game officials and opposing players and even walked onto the court. He was almost ejected from a Lakers playoff game in May 2003 after he yelled at the game's referee.

Nicholson is a collector of 20th century and contemporary art, including the work of Henri Matisse, Tamara de Lempicka, Andy Warhol and Jack Vettriano. In 1995, artist Ed Ruscha was quoted saying that Nicholson has "one of the best collections out here."

Nicholson described himself as a "lifelong Irish Democrat". Although he is personally against abortion, he is pro-choice. He has said "I'm pro-choice but against abortion because I'm an illegitimate child myself and it would be hypocritical to take any other position. I'd be dead. I wouldn't exist." He has also said that he has "nothing but total admiration, gratitude and respect for the strength of the women who made the decision they made in my individual case."

During a 1992 "Vanity Fair" interview, Nicholson stated, "I don't believe in God now. I can still work up an envy for someone who has a faith. I can see how that could be a deeply soothing experience."

In May 2008, then-California Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger and First Lady Maria Shriver announced that Nicholson would be inducted into the California Hall of Fame, located at The California Museum for History, Women and the Arts. The induction ceremony took place on December 15, 2008, where he was inducted alongside 11 other Californians.

In 2010, Nicholson was inducted into the New Jersey Hall of Fame.

In 2011, Nicholson received an honorary Doctor of Fine Arts degree from Brown University at its 243rd commencement. At the ceremony, Ruth Simmons, Brown University's president, called him, "the most skilled actor of our lifetime."

With 12 Academy Award nominations (eight for Best Actor and four for Best Supporting Actor), Nicholson is the most nominated male actor in Academy Awards history. Only Nicholson (1960s–2000s), Michael Caine (1960s–2000s), Meryl Streep (1970s–2010s), Paul Newman (1950s–1960s, 1980s–2000s) and Laurence Olivier (1930s–1970s) have been nominated for an acting (lead or supporting) Academy Award in five different decades.

With three Oscar wins, he also ties with Walter Brennan, Daniel Day-Lewis, Ingrid Bergman and Meryl Streep for the second-most Oscar wins in acting categories. Only Katharine Hepburn, with four Oscars, won more.

In 2013, Nicholson co-presented the Academy Award for Best Picture with First Lady Michelle Obama. This ceremony marked the eighth time he has presented the Academy Award for Best Picture (1972, 1977, 1978, 1990, 1993, 2006, 2007 and 2013). Nicholson is an active and voting member of the Academy.

Nicholson has acted in over 67 films and at least a dozen television shows since beginning his career 60 years ago. He has won three Academy Awards, and with 12 nominations, he is the most nominated male actor in the Academy's history.

Among his most notable films are "Easy Rider" (1969), "Five Easy Pieces" (1970), "The Last Detail" (1973), "Chinatown" (1974), "The Passenger" (1975), "One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest" (1975), "The Shining" (1980), "Terms of Endearment" (1983), "Batman" (1989), "A Few Good Men" (1992), "As Good as It Gets" (1997), "About Schmidt" (2002), "Something's Gotta Give" (2003), "The Departed" (2006) and "The Bucket List" (2007).



</doc>
<doc id="20913302" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20913302" title="Robert De Niro">
Robert De Niro

Robert Anthony De Niro Jr. (; born August 17, 1943) is an American actor, producer, and director who holds both American and Italian citizenship.

De Niro was cast as the young Vito Corleone in the 1974 film "The Godfather Part II", for which he won the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor. His longtime collaboration with director Martin Scorsese earned him the Academy Award for Best Actor for his portrayal of Jake LaMotta in the 1980 film "Raging Bull". He received the AFI Life Achievement Award in 2003, the Golden Globe Cecil B. DeMille Award in 2010, and the Presidential Medal of Freedom from President Barack Obama in 2016.

De Niro's first major film roles were in the sports drama "Bang the Drum Slowly" (1973) and Scorsese's crime film "Mean Streets" (1973). He earned Academy Award nominations for the psychological thrillers "Taxi Driver" (1976) and "Cape Fear" (1991), both directed by Scorsese. De Niro received additional nominations for Michael Cimino's Vietnam war drama "The Deer Hunter" (1978), Penny Marshall's drama "Awakenings" (1990), and David O. Russell's romantic comedy-drama "Silver Linings Playbook" (2012). His portrayal of gangster Jimmy Conway in Scorsese's crime film "Goodfellas" (1990), and his role as Rupert Pupkin in the black comedy film "The King of Comedy" (1983), earned him BAFTA Award nominations.

De Niro has earned four nominations for the Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy, for his work in the musical drama "New York, New York" (1977), the action comedy "Midnight Run" (1988), the gangster comedy "Analyze This" (1999), and the comedy "Meet the Parents" (2000). Other notable performances include roles in "Once Upon a Time in America" (1984), "Brazil" (1985), "The Mission" (1986), "The Untouchables" (1987), "Heat" (1995), and "Casino" (1995). He has directed and starred in films such as the crime drama "A Bronx Tale" (1993) and the spy film "The Good Shepherd" (2006).

Robert Anthony De Niro Jr. was born on August 17, 1943, in the Greenwich Village area of Manhattan, New York, the son of painters Virginia Admiral and Robert De Niro Sr. He is of Irish and Italian descent on his father's side, while his mother had Dutch, English, French, and German ancestry. De Niro's parents, who had met at the painting classes of Hans Hofmann in Provincetown, Massachusetts, divorced when he was two years old after his father announced that he was gay. De Niro was raised by his mother in the Greenwich Village and Little Italy areas of Manhattan. His father lived within walking distance and De Niro spent much time with him as he grew up. His mother was raised Presbyterian but became an atheist as an adult, while his father had been a lapsed Catholic since the age of 12. Against his parents' wishes, his grandparents had him secretly baptized into the Catholic Church while he was staying with them during his parents' divorce.

De Niro attended PS 41, a public elementary school in Manhattan, through the sixth grade. He then went to Elisabeth Irwin High School, the private upper school of the Little Red School House, for the seventh and eighth grades. He was accepted into the High School of Music and Art for the ninth grade, but only attended for a short time before transferring to a public junior high school. De Niro began high school at the private McBurney School and later attended the private Rhodes Preparatory School, although he graduated from neither. Nicknamed "Bobby Milk" for his pallor, De Niro hung out with a group of street kids as a youth in Little Italy, some of whom have remained his lifelong friends. His stage debut was at age 10, when he played the Cowardly Lion in a school production of "The Wizard of Oz". Along with finding relief from shyness through performing, he was also fixated by cinema, and he dropped out of high school at age 16 to pursue acting. He studied acting at HB Studio, the Stella Adler Conservatory, as well as Lee Strasberg's Actors Studio.

De Niro's first film role came at the age of 20, when he appeared in Brian De Palma's 1963 film "The Wedding Party", but the film was not released until 1969. He then appeared in Roger Corman's film "Bloody Mama" (1970). He gained popular attention with his role as a dying Major League Baseball player in "Bang the Drum Slowly" (1973) and began his collaboration with Martin Scorsese when he played the small-time criminal Johnny Boy in "Mean Streets" (1973).

De Niro had a pivotal role in the Francis Ford Coppola film "The Godfather Part II" (1974), playing the young Vito Corleone. Coppola had remembered his previous auditions for the roles of Sonny Corleone, Michael Corleone, Carlo Rizzi, and Paulie Gatto in "The Godfather". His performance earned him his first Academy Award, for Best Supporting Actor, although Coppola accepted the award as De Niro was not present at the ceremony. De Niro became the first actor to win an Academy Award speaking mainly a foreign language. In this case, several Sicilian dialects, although he delivered a few lines in English. He and Marlon Brando, who played the older Vito Corleone in the first film, are the only actors to have won Oscars for portraying the same fictional character.
After working with Scorsese in "Mean Streets", De Niro went on to have a successful working relationship with him in films such as "Taxi Driver" (1976), "New York, New York" (1977), "Raging Bull" (1980), "The King of Comedy" (1983), "Goodfellas" (1990), "Cape Fear" (1991), and "Casino" (1995). They also acted together in "Guilty by Suspicion" (1991) and provided their voices for the animated feature "Shark Tale" (2004). "Taxi Driver" was particularly important to De Niro's career. His iconic performance as Travis Bickle catapulted him to stardom and forever linked his name with Bickle's famous "You talkin' to me?" monologue, which De Niro largely improvised. The role of Bickle earned him his first Academy Award Nomination for Best Actor. His portrayal of Jake LaMotta in "Raging Bull" was lauded, as well as his interpretation of Max Cady in "Cape Fear".

In 1976, De Niro appeared in "1900", Bernardo Bertolucci's biographical exploration of life in Italy before World War II, seen through the eyes of two Italian childhood friends at the opposite sides of society's hierarchy. He also starred in "The Last Tycoon" (1976), directed by Elia Kazan. Kazan recalls that De Niro "would do almost anything to succeed" and noted that he cut his weight down from 170 to 128 pounds for the role in this film. Kazan adds that De Niro "is one of a select number of actors I've directed who work hard at their trade, and the only one who asked to rehearse on Sundays. Most of the others play tennis. Bobby and I would go over the scenes to be shot. Bobby is more meticulous... he's very imaginative. He's very precise. He figures everything out both inside and outside. He has good emotion. He's a character actor: everything he does he calculates. In a good way, but he calculates." Kazan developed and used those personality traits for his character in the film. And although the film did poorly at the box office, reviewers praised De Niro's acting. Film critic Marie Brenner wrote that "for De Niro, it is a role that surpasses even his brilliant and daring portrayal of Vito Corleone in "The Godfather Part II"... his performance deserves to be compared with the very finest".

De Niro played Michael Vronsky in the acclaimed Vietnam War film "The Deer Hunter" (1978), for which he was nominated for Best Actor in a Leading Role. Fearing he had become typecast in mob roles, he began expanding into occasional comedic roles in the mid-1980s and has had much success there as well, with such films as "Brazil" (1985), "Midnight Run" (1988), "Analyze This" (1999), "Meet the Parents" (2000), and "Meet the Fockers" (2004). Other films include "True Confessions" (1981), "Falling in Love" (1984), "Once Upon a Time in America" (1984), "The Mission" (1986), "Angel Heart" (1987), "The Untouchables" (1987), "Goodfellas" (1990), "Awakenings" (1990), "Mary Shelley's Frankenstein" (1994), "Heat" (1995), "The Fan" (1996), "Sleepers" (1996), "Wag the Dog" (1997), "Jackie Brown" (1997), "Ronin" (1998) and "Flawless" (1999).

In 1987, De Niro was the President of the Jury at the 15th Moscow International Film Festival. He appeared in "This Boy's Life" (1993). Around this time, he was offered the role of Mitch Leary in "In the Line of Fire" (1993). However, due to scheduling conflicts with his directorial debut "A Bronx Tale" (1993), he gave up the role to John Malkovich, who later received an Academy Award nomination for it. In "A Bronx Tale", which De Niro agreed to direct after seeing the screenwriter's one-man off-Broadway play, he played a bus driver who struggles to keep his son away from a local mobster. At the 20th Moscow International Film Festival in 1997, he was awarded an Honorable Prize for contribution to cinema.

De Niro would reference "In the Line of Fire", along with "Dirty Harry" (1971) and "Magnum Force" (1973), two more of Eastwood's films, in "Righteous Kill" (2008). He also appeared in the crime drama "Cop Land" (1997). He starred in the police action-thriller "Heat" (1995), along with fellow actor and long-time friend, Al Pacino. The duo drew much attention from fans, as both have generally been compared throughout their careers. Though Pacino and De Niro both starred in "The Godfather Part II" (1974), they shared no screen time. They once again appeared together in "Righteous Kill" (2008).

De Niro played Master Chief Billy Sunday in the biographical film "Men of Honor" (2000), based on the life of Carl Brashear, the first African American to become a U.S. Navy Master Diver. He also hosted "9/11" (2002), a documentary about the 9/11 attacks, shown on CBS and focusing on video footage made by Jules and Gedeon Naudet that showed the role of firefighters following the attacks. He reprised his role as Jack Byrnes in "Meet the Fockers" (2004) and was featured in "Stardust" (2007). All of the films were successful at the box office, but received mixed reviews.
De Niro had to turn down a role in "The Departed" (2006) due to commitments with preparing "The Good Shepherd" (2006). He said: "I wanted to. I wish I could've been able to, but I was preparing "The Good Shepherd" so much that I couldn't take the time to. I was trying to figure a way to do it while I was preparing. It just didn't seem possible." In June 2006, it was announced that De Niro had donated his film archive (including scripts, costumes, and props) to the Harry Ransom Center at the University of Texas at Austin. On April 27, 2009, it was announced that the De Niro collection at the Ransom Center was open to researchers and the public. De Niro directed and starred in "The Good Shepherd" (2006). The film reunited him onscreen with Joe Pesci, with whom he had starred in "Raging Bull", "Goodfellas", "A Bronx Tale", "Once Upon a Time in America", and "Casino".
De Niro announced that he would appear in the film version of the BBC crime series "Edge of Darkness" in 2010. However, just after he arrived to begin shooting, De Niro left the film due to creative differences. He was replaced by Ray Winstone. He appeared as Senator John McLaughlin in the action film "Machete" (2010), and starred in the thriller "Stone" (2010). He again reprised his role as Jack Byrnes in "Little Fockers" (2010). He appeared in the action film "Killer Elite" (2011), "Limitless" (2011) and the romantic comedy film "New Year's Eve" (2011).

De Niro starred in the film "Manuale d'amore 3" (2011). In January 2011, CBS picked up De Niro's crime pilot, "NYC 22" (originally titled "Rookies"), but it was cancelled after airing only four episodes. In 2011, De Niro was the President of the Jury for the 64th Cannes Film Festival. In 2012, he starred in the films "Silver Linings Playbook", "Freelancers", "Red Lights", and "Being Flynn". He received a nomination for an Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor for his role in "Silver Linings Playbook".

De Niro's capital ventures have included co-founding the film studio TriBeCa Productions, the Tribeca Film Festival, the restaurants Nobu and Tribeca Grill (which he co-owns with Broadway producer Stewart F. Lane), The Greenwich Hotel (located in Tribeca), and the restaurant inside the hotel, Locanda Verde (run by executive chef and co-owner Andrew Carmellini). According to the July 2010 issue of "Gourmet" magazine, De Niro is in negotiations with an internationally renowned chef, Natalia Jibladze, to launch an as-yet-unnamed restaurant in Manhattan under his Tribeca trademark. When in Malaysia in 2010, he dined with the Malaysian Prime Minister's wife and was asked to open a Malay restaurant in Alor Setar, Kedah.

De Niro studied with Stella Adler, from whom he learned about the techniques of the Stanislavski system. The technique encouraged him to explore both internal and external aspects to fully realize the character being portrayed. He is praised for his commitment to roles; he gained 60 lb (27 kg) and learned how to box for his role as Jake LaMotta in "Raging Bull", ground his teeth down for "Cape Fear", lived in Sicily for "The Godfather Part II", worked as a cab driver for a few weeks for "Taxi Driver", and learned to play the saxophone for "New York, New York". He again put on weight for his performance as Al Capone in "The Untouchables".

De Niro's brand of acting includes employing whatever extreme tactic he feels is necessary to elicit the best performance from those with whom he is working. During the filming of "The King of Comedy", he directed a slew of anti-Semitic epithets at co-star Jerry Lewis to enhance and authenticate the anger demonstrated by Lewis' character. According to "People" magazine, the technique was successful, with Lewis recalling, "I forgot the cameras were there... I was going for Bobby's throat."

De Niro married his first wife, Diahnne Abbott, in 1976. They have a son, Raphael, a former actor who works in New York real estate. De Niro also adopted Abbott's daughter Drena De Niro from a previous relationship. They divorced in 1988. De Niro has twin sons Aaron Kendrick and Julian Henry de Niro conceived by "in vitro" fertilization and delivered by a surrogate mother in 1995, from a long relationship with former model Toukie Smith.

In 1997, De Niro married his second wife, actress Grace Hightower, at their Marbletown home. Their son Elliot was born in 1998 and the couple split in 1999. The divorce was never finalized and in 2004 they renewed their vows. In December 2011, a daughter named Helen Grace was born via surrogate. In addition to his six children, De Niro has four grandchildren, one from his daughter Drena and three from his son Raphael.

De Niro announced on March 25, 2016, that his son Elliot has autism and explained his interest in its causes and treatment.

It was reported in October 2003 that De Niro had been diagnosed with prostate cancer. He underwent surgery at the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in December 2003.

De Niro, who has long resided in New York City, has been investing in Manhattan's Tribeca neighborhood since 1989. He has residences on the east and west sides of Manhattan. He also has a estate in Gardiner, New York, which serves as his primary residence.
Tribeca Grill is a New American restaurant located at 375 Greenwich Street (at Franklin Street) in Tribeca, Manhattan, in New York City, co-owned by Robert De Niro, Drew Nieporent and Lou Diamond Phillips, among others.[1][2][3][4] It opened in 1990. The Executive Chef is Scott Burnett. The "large mahogany bar is from the Maxwell's Plum restaurant."[5]
During a film shoot in France in February 1998, De Niro was questioned as a witness about the Bourgeois prostitution ring. De Niro denied any involvement, later filing a complaint. Despite saying at the time that he would not return to France, he later filmed there and presided over the jury at the 2011 Cannes Film Festival.

In 2006, the trust that owns De Niro's Gardiner estate sued the town to have its property tax assessment reduced, arguing that, at $6 million, it was too high and should be compared only with similar properties in Ulster County, where Gardiner is located. The town, which had been comparing its value to similar estates in Dutchess County, across the Hudson River, and Connecticut's Litchfield County, east of Dutchess, where many other wealthy New York City residents maintain estates on large properties, won in State Supreme Court. But in 2014, the trust's lawyers appealed the decision and the town was unsure if it should continue to defend the suit because of its own financial limitations (it would have earned far less in payments on the increased taxes than it had spent in legal bills). This has made many residents, who initially sympathized with De Niro, angry, and some proposed to raise money privately to help the town continue the suit.

A local newspaper's report on the continued dispute was picked up by "The New York Times" and made international news. "When he read about it on Election Day, he went bananas," due to the negative publicity, said Gardiner town councilman Wiegand. He had apparently been unaware that the trust had filed the lawsuit. Its accountants took the blame, citing their fiduciary duty. A short time later, his lawyer met with town officials, at De Niro's direction, and offered them withdrawal of the suit and $129,000 in reimbursement for the town's legal bills, paid by the accounting firm. "[He] made it very clear that De Niro didn't want to screw the town, that he didn't know about any of it and that he wanted it settled as quickly as possible," Wiegand said.

In 1998, he lobbied Congress against impeaching President Bill Clinton.

While promoting the film "The Good Shepherd" with co-star Matt Damon on the December 8, 2006, episode of "Hardball with Chris Matthews" at George Mason University, De Niro was asked whom he would like to see as President of the United States. De Niro responded, "Well, I think of two people: Hillary Clinton and Obama." On February 4, 2008, De Niro supported Obama at a rally at the Izod Center in New Jersey before Super Tuesday.

In 2012, De Niro joined the anti-fracking campaign Artists Against Fracking.

During the 2016 presidential campaign, De Niro was an outspoken critic of candidate Donald Trump, calling him "so blatantly stupid" and stating, "He wants to punch people in the face?! I'd like to punch him in the face." This was in reference to the similar desire Trump expressed towards the DNC speakers at one of his rallies.

De Niro was raised by an atheist mother and a lapsed Catholic father who left the Catholic Church at age 12. His grandparents had him secretly baptized Catholic, and his grandmother was the main advocate of Catholicism in the family. He refuses to be asked about religion in interviews.

When asked why he would not play Jesus Christ in Martin Scorsese's 1988 film "The Last Temptation of Christ", he explained on at least two different occasions:

In addition, De Niro has played a number of Catholic characters in his movies. He played a Catholic penitent in the 1986 film "The Mission".

De Niro initially supported the inclusion of the controversial documentary about an alleged vaccination coverup, "Vaxxed", at the 2016 Tribeca Film Festival. He explained his interest in the film resulted from his family experience with an autistic son. De Niro withdrew his recommendation after discussion with the scientific community. He said he was pressured by some festival filmmakers to remove "Vaxxed" from the festival line-up. He also said that he intends to be a part of the conversation about vaccines and autism in the future. The director of the film, Andrew Wakefield, who is considered the father of the anti-vaccination movement, had reportedly been communicating with Grace Hightower and once reportedly told them that "your family's life [has] been blighted by autism".

De Niro received an Italian passport in 2006. His Italian citizenship was granted by the Prime Minister despite strong opposition by the Sons of Italy, who believe that De Niro damaged the public image of Italians by portraying criminals.





</doc>
<doc id="42083" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42083" title="Clark Gable">
Clark Gable

William Clark Gable (February 1, 1901 – November 16, 1960) was an American film actor and military officer, often referred to as "The King of Hollywood" or just simply as "The King". He began his career as a stage actor and appeared as an extra in silent films between 1924 and 1926, and progressed to supporting roles with a few films for Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer in 1931. The next year, he landed his first leading Hollywood role and over the next three decades he became a leading man in more than 60 motion pictures.

Gable won an Academy Award for Best Actor for "It Happened One Night" (1934), and was nominated for leading roles in "Mutiny on the Bounty" (1935) and for his best-known role as Rhett Butler in "Gone with the Wind" (1939).

Gable also found success commercially and critically with films such as "Red Dust" (1932), "Manhattan Melodrama" (1934), "San Francisco" (1936), "Saratoga" (1937) "Boom Town" (1940), "The Hucksters" (1947), "Homecoming" (1948), and "The Misfits" (1961), which was his final screen appearance.

Gable appeared opposite some of the most popular actresses of the time. Joan Crawford was his favorite actress to work with, and she was partnered with Gable in eight films. Myrna Loy worked with him seven times, and he was paired with Jean Harlow in six productions. He also starred with Lana Turner in four features, and with Norma Shearer and Ava Gardner in three each. Gable's final film, "The Misfits" (1961), united him with Marilyn Monroe (also in her last completed screen appearance). 

Gable is considered one of the most consistent box-office performers in history, appearing on Quigley Publishing's annual Top Ten Money Making Stars Poll 16 times. He was named the seventh-greatest male star of classic American cinema by the American Film Institute.

William Clark Gable was born in Cadiz, Ohio, to William Henry "Will" Gable (1870–1948), an oil-well driller, and his wife, Adeline (née Hershelman). His father was a Protestant and his mother a Roman Catholic. Gable was named William after his father, but even in childhood, he was almost always called Clark or sometimes Billy. He was mistakenly listed as a female on his birth certificate. Among Gable's ancestors were Pennsylvania Dutch (German), Belgians, Rhinelanders, and Bavarians.

When Gable was six months old, he was baptized at a Roman Catholic church in Dennison, Ohio. His mother died when he was ten months old, possibly from a brain tumor, although the official cause of death was given as an epileptic fit. William Gable refused to raise his son Catholic, which provoked criticism from the Hershelman family. The dispute was resolved when Will Gable agreed to allow his son to spend time with his maternal uncle, Charles Hershelman, and his wife on their farm in Vernon Township, Pennsylvania.

In April 1903, Gable's father married Jennie Dunlap (1874–1919), whose family came from the small neighboring town of Hopedale. The marriage produced no children. Gable was a tall, shy child with a loud voice. His stepmother raised him to be well-dressed and well-groomed. Jennie played the piano and gave her stepson lessons at home. Later he took up brass instruments. At 13, he was the only boy in the men's town band. He was very mechanically inclined and loved to strip down and repair cars with his father. Although his father insisted on Gable doing "manly" things, like hunting and hard physical work, Gable loved language. Among trusted company, he would recite Shakespeare, particularly the sonnets.

Will Gable agreed to buy a 72-volume set of "The World's Greatest Literature" to improve his son's education, but claimed he never saw his son use it. In 1917, when Gable was in high school, his father had financial difficulties. Will decided to settle his debts and try his hand at farming, and the family moved to Ravenna, Ohio, near Akron. Despite his father's insistence that he work the farm, Gable soon left to work in Akron for the Firestone Tire and Rubber Company.

At 17, Clark Gable was inspired to be an actor after seeing the play "The Bird of Paradise", but he was not able to make a real start until he turned 21 and inherited some money.

By then, his stepmother had died, and his father moved to Tulsa, Oklahoma to go back to the oil business. Gable toured in stock companies, as well as working the oil fields and as a horse manager. He found work with several second-class theater companies, thus making his way across the Midwest to Seaside, Oregon, working as a logger, and to Portland, Oregon, where he worked as a necktie salesman in the Meier & Frank department store. In Portland, he met Laura Hope Crews, a stage and film actress, who encouraged him to return to the stage with another theater company. Twenty years later, Crews played Aunt Pittypat alongside Gable's Rhett Butler in "Gone With the Wind" (1939).

Gable's acting coach, Josephine Dillon — a theater manager in Portland – was 17 years older than him. She paid to have his teeth repaired and his hair styled. She guided him in building up his chronically undernourished body, and taught him better body control and posture. She spent considerable time training his naturally high-pitched voice, which he slowly managed to lower, to gain better resonance and tone. As his speech habits improved, his facial expressions became more natural and convincing. After a long period of training, Dillon considered him ready to attempt a film career.

In 1924, with Dillon's financing, they went to Hollywood, where she became Gable's manager and first wife. He changed his stage name from W. C. Gable to Clark Gable. He found work as an extra in such silent films as Erich von Stroheim's "The Merry Widow" (1925), "The Plastic Age" (1925), which starred Clara Bow, "Forbidden Paradise" (1924), starring Pola Negri, plus a series of two-reel comedies called "The Pacemakers". He appeared as an extra in Fox's "The Johnstown Flood" (1926). Seventeen-year-old Carole Lombard, later his third wife, also appeared as an extra in that film, although they were not in the same scene. He also appeared as a bit player in a series of shorts.

However, he was not offered any major film roles, so he returned to the stage. He became lifelong friends with Lionel Barrymore, who, despite initially bawling Gable out for what he deemed amateurish acting, urged him to pursue a career on stage. During the 1927–28 theater season, he acted with the Laskin Brothers Stock Company in Houston, Texas, where he played many roles, gained considerable experience, and became a local matinee idol. He then moved to New York City, and Dillon sought work for him on Broadway. He received good reviews in "Machinal" (1928); "He's young, vigorous and brutally masculine", wrote the critic at "The Morning Telegraph". 

In 1930, after his impressive appearance as the seething and desperate character Killer Mears in the Los Angeles stage production of "The Last Mile", Gable was offered a contract with Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer. His first role in a sound picture was as the unshaven villain in a low-budget William Boyd Western called "The Painted Desert" (1931). He received a lot of fan mail as a result of his powerful voice and appearance; the studio took notice.

In 1930, Gable and Josephine Dillon were divorced. A few days later, he married Texas socialite Maria Franklin Prentiss Lucas Langham, nicknamed "Rhea". After moving to California, they were married again in 1931, possibly due to differences in state legal requirements. "His ears are too big and he looks like an ape", said executive Darryl F. Zanuck, then at Warner Bros., about Gable after testing him for the lead in the studio's gangster drama "Little Caesar" (1931). 

The same year, in "Night Nurse", Gable played a villainous chauffeur who was gradually starving two adorable little girls to death, then knocked Barbara Stanwyck's character unconscious with his fist, a supporting role originally slated for James Cagney until the release of "The Public Enemy" abruptly made Cagney a leading man. After several failed screen tests for Barrymore and Zanuck, Gable was signed in 1930 by MGM's Irving Thalberg. He became a client of well-connected agent Minna Wallis, sister of producer Hal Wallis and a very close friend of Norma Shearer.

Gable's arrival in Hollywood occurred fortuitously. MGM was looking to expand its stable of male stars and he fit the bill. He first worked mainly in supporting roles, often as the villain. He made two pictures in 1931 with Wallace Beery, a supporting role in "The Secret Six", then with his part increasing in size to almost match Beery's in the naval aviation film "Hell Divers". MGM's publicity manager Howard Strickling developed Gable's studio image, playing up his he-man experiences and his 'lumberjack in evening clothes' persona.

To bolster his increasing popularity, MGM frequently paired him with well-established female stars. Joan Crawford asked for him as her co-star in "Dance, Fools, Dance" (1931). He built his fame and public visibility in such movies as "A Free Soul" (1931), in which he played a gangster who shoved the character played by Norma Shearer; Gable never played a supporting role again. "The Hollywood Reporter" wrote "A star in the making has been made, one that, to our reckoning, will outdraw every other star... Never have we seen audiences work themselves into such enthusiasm as when Clark Gable walks on the screen". 

He followed that with "Susan Lenox (Her Fall and Rise)" (1931) with Greta Garbo, and "Possessed" (1931), in which Crawford (then married to Douglas Fairbanks Jr.) and he steamed up the screen. Adela Rogers St. Johns later dubbed Gable and Crawford's real-life relationship as "the affair that nearly burned Hollywood down". Louis B. Mayer threatened to terminate both their contracts, and for a while they kept apart. Gable shifted his attentions to Marion Davies. However, Gable and Garbo disliked each other. She thought he was a wooden actor, while he considered her a snob.

Gable was considered for the role of Tarzan in "Tarzan the Ape Man", but lost out to Johnny Weissmuller's more imposing physique and superior swimming prowess. However, Gable's unshaven lovemaking with braless Jean Harlow in "Red Dust" (1932) soon made him MGM's most important male star. 

After the hit "Hold Your Man" (1933), MGM recognized the goldmine of the Gable-Harlow pairing, putting them in two more films, "China Seas" (1935; with Gable and Harlow billed above Wallace Beery) and "Wife vs. Secretary" (1936) with Myrna Loy and James Stewart. An enormously popular combination, on-screen and off-screen, Gable and Harlow made six films together, the most notable being "Red Dust" (1932) and "Saratoga" (1937). Harlow died during production of "Saratoga". Ninety percent completed, the remaining scenes were filmed with long shots or the use of doubles like Mary Dees; Gable said that he felt as if he were "in the arms of a ghost".
MGM did not have a project ready for Gable and was paying him $2,000 per week, under his contract, to do nothing. Studio head Louis B. Mayer lent him to Columbia for $2,500 per week, making a $500 per week profit. Gable was not the first choice to play the lead role of Peter Warne in "It Happened One Night" (1934). Robert Montgomery was originally offered the role, but he declined, feeling the script was poor. 

Filming began in a tense atmosphere, but both Gable and director Frank Capra enjoyed making the movie. Gable won the Academy Award for Best Actor for his performance in the film, and the movie won the Academy Award for Best Picture. To Capra, Gable's character in the film most closely resembled his real personality:
He returned to MGM a bigger star than ever. He received an Academy Award nomination for his portrayal of Fletcher Christian in "Mutiny on the Bounty" (1935).

Gable made three pictures with Spencer Tracy, which boosted Tracy's career and cemented them in the public mind as a team. "San Francisco" (1936) featured Tracy in a brief but Oscar-nominated role in which he played a priest who knocks Gable, by then the studio's foremost leading man, down in a boxing ring.

Despite his reluctance to play the role, Gable is best known for his performance in "Gone with the Wind" (1939), for which he gained a Best Actor Oscar nomination. Carole Lombard may have been the first to suggest that he play Rhett Butler (and she play Scarlett) when she bought him a copy of the bestseller, which he refused to read.

Butler's last line in "Gone with the Wind", "Frankly, my dear, I don't give a damn," is one of the most famous lines in movie history. Gable was an almost immediate favorite for the role of Rhett with both the public and producer David O. Selznick. Since Selznick had no male stars under long-term contract, though, he needed to go through the process of negotiating to borrow an actor from another studio. Gary Cooper was Selznick's first choice. When Cooper turned down the role of Butler, he was quoted as saying, ""Gone With the Wind" is going to be the biggest flop in Hollywood history. I’m glad it'll be Clark Gable who's falling flat on his nose, not me." By then, Selznick had become determined to hire Gable, and set about finding a way to borrow him from MGM. Gable was wary of potentially disappointing an audience that had decided that no one else could play the part. He later conceded, "I think I know now how a fly must react after being caught in a spider's web."

By all accounts, Gable got along well with his co-stars during filming. Gable was great friends with actress Hattie McDaniel, and he even slipped her a real alcoholic drink during the scene in which they were supposed to be celebrating the birth of Scarlett and Rhett's daughter. Gable tried to boycott the premiere of "Gone with the Wind" in Atlanta, Georgia, because the African American McDaniel was not permitted to attend. He reportedly only went after she pleaded with him to go. Gable remained friends with McDaniel, and he always attended her Hollywood parties, especially when she was raising funds during World War II.

Gable did not want to shed tears for the scene after Rhett inadvertently causes Scarlett to miscarry their second child. Olivia de Havilland made him cry, later commenting, "...Oh, he would not do it. He would not! Victor (Fleming) tried everything with him. He tried to attack him on a professional level. We had done it without him weeping several times and then we had one last try. I said, 'You can do it, I know you can do it and you will be wonderful...' Well, by heaven, just before the cameras rolled, you could see the tears come up at his eyes and he played the scene unforgettably well. He put his whole heart into it."

Decades later, Gable said that whenever his career would start to fade, a rerelease of "Gone with the Wind" would soon revive his popularity, and he continued as a top leading actor for the rest of his life.

Gable's marriage in 1939 to his third wife, actress Carole Lombard (1908–1942), was the happiest period of his personal life. They met while filming 1932's "No Man of Her Own", when Lombard was still married to actor William Powell, but their romance did not take off until 1936. They became reacquainted at a party and soon were inseparable, cited in fan magazines and tabloids as an official couple. Gable thrived being around Lombard's youthful, charming, and frank personality, once stating, "You can trust that little screwball with your life or your hopes or your weaknesses, and she wouldn't even know how to think about letting you down." Lombard, for her part, seemed to gain personal stability and a contented home life that she had previously lacked. She taught herself how to hunt and fish and accompanied Gable on trips with his hunting companions.

Gable was still legally married, and he prolonged a lengthy and expensive divorce from his second wife Rhea Langham. His salary from "Gone with the Wind" enabled him to reach a divorce settlement with Langham, however, on March 7, 1939. On March 29, during a production break on "Gone with the Wind", Gable and Lombard were married in Kingman, Arizona. They purchased a ranch previously owned by director Raoul Walsh in Encino, California, and made it their home. They raised chickens and horses, and had a menagerie of cats and dogs.

On January 16, 1942, Lombard was a passenger on Transcontinental and Western Air Flight 3 with her mother and press agent Otto Winkler. She had just finished her 57th movie, "To Be or Not to Be", and was on her way home from a successful war bond selling tour when the flight's DC-3 airliner crashed into a mountain near Las Vegas, Nevada, killing all 22 passengers aboard, including 15 servicemen en route to training in California. Gable flew to the crash site to claim the bodies of his wife, mother-in-law, and Winkler, who had been the best man at Gable and Lombard's wedding. Lombard was declared to be the first war-related American female casualty of World War II, and Gable received a personal note of condolence from President Roosevelt. The Civil Aeronautics Board investigation into the crash concluded that pilot error was its cause.

Gable returned to their Encino ranch and carried out her funeral wishes as she had requested in her will. A month later, he returned to the studio to work with Lana Turner in the movie "Somewhere I'll Find You". Having lost 20 pounds since the tragedy, Gable evidently was emotionally and physically devastated by it, but Turner stated that Gable remained a professional for the duration of filming. He acted in 27 more films and remarried twice more. "But he was never the same," said Esther Williams. "He had been devastated by Carole's death."

In 1942, following Lombard's death, Gable joined the U.S. Army Air Forces. Lombard had suggested that Gable enlist as part of the war effort, but MGM was reluctant to let him go, and he resisted the suggestion. Gable made a public statement after Lombard's death that prompted the Commanding General of the U.S. Army Air Forces Henry H. "Hap" Arnold to offer Gable a "special assignment" in aerial gunnery.

"The Washington Evening Star" reported that Gable took a physical examination at Bolling Field on June 19, preliminary to joining the service.

Gable had earlier expressed an interest in officer candidate school, but he enlisted on August 12, 1942, with the intention of becoming an enlisted aerial gunner on a bomber. MGM arranged for his studio friend, the cinematographer Andrew McIntyre, to enlist with him and accompany him through training.

However, shortly after his enlistment, McIntyre and he were sent to Miami Beach, Florida, where they entered USAAF OCS Class 42-E on August 17, 1942. Both completed training on October 28, 1942, commissioned as second lieutenants. His class of about 2,600 fellow students (of which he ranked about 700th in class standing) selected Gable as its graduation speaker, at which General Arnold presented the cadets with their commissions. Arnold then informed Gable of his special assignment: to make a recruiting film in combat with the Eighth Air Force to recruit aerial gunners. Gable and McIntyre were immediately sent to Flexible Gunnery School at Tyndall Field, Florida, followed by a photography course at Fort George Wright, Washington State and promoted to first lieutenants upon its completion.
Gable reported to Biggs Army Air Base, Texas, on January 27, 1943, to train with and accompany the 351st Bomb Group to England as head of a six-man motion picture unit. In addition to McIntyre, he recruited the screenwriter John Lee Mahin, camera operators Sgts. Mario Toti and Robert Boles, and the sound man Lt. Howard Voss to complete his crew. Gable was promoted to captain while he was with the 351st Bomb Group at Pueblo Army Air Base, Colorado, a rank commensurate with his position as a unit commander. (As first lieutenants, McIntyre and he had equal seniority.)

Gable spent most of 1943 in England at RAF Polebrook with the 351st Bomb Group. Gable flew five combat missions, including one to Germany, as an observer-gunner in B-17 Flying Fortresses between May 4 and September 23, 1943, earning the Air Medal and the Distinguished Flying Cross for his efforts. During one of the missions, Gable's aircraft was damaged by flak and attacked by fighters, which knocked out one of the engines and shot up the stabilizer. In the raid on Germany, one crewman was killed and two others were wounded, and flak went through Gable's boot and narrowly missed his head. When word of this reached MGM, studio executives began to badger the Army Air Forces to reassign its most valuable screen actor to noncombat duty. In November 1943, Gable returned to the United States to edit his film, only to find that the personnel shortage of aerial gunners had already been rectified. He was allowed to complete the film anyway, joining the First Motion Picture Unit in Hollywood.

In May 1944, Gable was promoted to major. He hoped for another combat assignment, but when the invasion of Normandy came and went in June without any further orders, Gable was relieved from active duty as a major on June 12, 1944, at his request, since he was over-age for combat. His discharge papers were signed by Captain (later U.S. President) Ronald Reagan. Gable completed editing of the film "Combat America" in September 1944, giving the narration himself and making use of numerous interviews with enlisted gunners as focus of the film. Because his motion picture production schedule made it impossible for him to fulfill reserve officer duties, he resigned his commission on September 26, 1947, a week after the Air Force became an independent service branch.

Adolf Hitler favored Gable above all other actors. During World War II, Hitler offered a sizable reward to anyone who could capture and bring Gable to him unscathed.

Gable's military awards were the Distinguished Flying Cross, Air Medal, American Campaign Medal, European-African-Middle Eastern Campaign Medal, and World War II Victory Medal. He also qualified for and received aerial gunner wings.

He made good use of his wartime experiences in the movie Command Decision (1948), playing a World War II brigadier general who supervised bombing raids over Germany.

Immediately after his discharge from the service, Gable returned to his ranch and rested. He resumed a prewar relationship with Virginia Grey and dated other starlets. He introduced his golf caddie Robert Wagner to MGM casting. Gable's first movie after World War II was "Adventure" (1945), with his ill-matched co-star Greer Garson. It was a critical and commercial failure despite the famous teaser tagline "Gable's back and Garson's got him".

After Joan Crawford's third divorce, Gable and she resumed their affair and lived together for a brief time. Gable was acclaimed for his performance in "The Hucksters" (1947), a satire of postwar Madison Avenue corruption and immorality. A very public and brief romance with Paulette Goddard occurred after that. In 1949, Gable married Sylvia Ashley, a British model and actress who was previously married to Douglas Fairbanks. The relationship was profoundly unsuccessful; they divorced in 1952. Soon followed "Never Let Me Go" (1953), opposite Gene Tierney. Tierney was a favorite of Gable and he was very disappointed when she was replaced in "Mogambo" (because of her mental health problems) by Grace Kelly. "Mogambo" (1953), directed by John Ford, was a somewhat sanitized remake of his earlier Pre-Code film "Red Dust", with Jean Harlow and Mary Astor, which had been a greater success. Gable's on-location affair with Grace Kelly (1929–1982), who was young enough to be his daughter, gradually ended after filming was completed.
Gable became increasingly unhappy with what he considered mediocre roles offered him by MGM, while the studio regarded his salary as excessive. Studio head Louis B. Mayer was fired in 1951 amid slumping Hollywood production and revenue, due primarily to the rising popularity of television. Studio chiefs struggled to cut costs. Many MGM stars were fired or their contracts were not renewed, including Greer Garson and Judy Garland. In 1953, Gable refused to renew his contract and began to work independently. His first two films in this new situation were "Soldier of Fortune" and "The Tall Men" (both 1955), which were profitable, although only modest successes. In 1955, Gable married his fifth wife, Kay Spreckels (née Kathleen Williams), a thrice-married former fashion model and actress who had previously been married to sugar-refining heir Adolph B. Spreckels Jr. Gable became stepfather to her son Bunker Spreckels, who went on to live a notorious celebrity lifestyle in the late 1960s and early 1970s surfing scene, ultimately leading to his early death in 1977.
In 1955, Gable formed a production company with Jane Russell and her husband Bob Waterfield, and they produced "The King and Four Queens" (1956), Gable's only production. He found producing and acting to be too taxing on his health, and he was beginning to manifest a noticeable tremor, particularly in long takes. His next project was "Band of Angels" (1957), with relative newcomer Sidney Poitier and Yvonne De Carlo; it was not well received despite Gable's role's similarities to Rhett Butler. "Newsweek" said, "Here is a movie so bad that it must be seen to be disbelieved." Next, he paired with Doris Day in "Teacher's Pet" (1958), shot in black and white. The film was good enough to bring Gable more movie offers, including "Run Silent, Run Deep" (also 1958), with co-star and producer Burt Lancaster, which featured his first on-screen death since 1937, and which garnered good reviews. Gable started to receive television offers, but rejected them outright. At 57, Gable finally acknowledged, "Now it's time I acted my age". His next two films were light comedies for Paramount: "But Not for Me" (1959) with Carroll Baker and "It Started in Naples" (1960) with Sophia Loren. The last one, despite an icy critical reception, was a good box-office success and was nominated for an Academy award and two Golden Globes. Filmed mostly on location in Italy, it was Gable's last film released in color.

On February 8, 1960, Gable received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame for his work in motion pictures, located at 1608 Vine Street.

Gable's last film was "The Misfits" (1961), with a script by Arthur Miller and directed by John Huston. Co-starring with Gable were Marilyn Monroe, her last completed film; Montgomery Clift; Eli Wallach; and Thelma Ritter. Many critics regard Gable's performance to be his finest, and Gable, after seeing the rough cuts, agreed.

Portraitist Al Hirschfeld created a drawing, and then a lithograph, portraying the film's stars Clift, Monroe, and Gable with screenwriter Miller, in what is suggested as a typical "on-the-set" scene during the troubled production. Throughout his life, Gable was fond of the work of artist Reinhold Palenske, and they were close friends.

Gable was politically conservative, though he never publicly spoke about politics. His third wife, Carole Lombard, was an activist liberal Democrat, and she cajoled him into supporting Democratic President Franklin D. Roosevelt and the New Deal. In 1944, he became an early member of the conservative Motion Picture Alliance for the Preservation of American Ideals, alongside Ronald Reagan, John Wayne, Gary Cooper, and other conservative actors and filmmakers. In February 1952, he attended a televised rally in New York where he enthusiastically urged General Dwight D. Eisenhower to run for president. This was when Eisenhower was still being sought by both parties as their candidate. Despite having suffered a severe coronary thrombosis, Gable still managed to vote by mail in the 1960 presidential election for Richard Nixon.

On November 6, 1960, Gable was sent to Hollywood Presbyterian Medical Center in Los Angeles, California, where doctors found that he had suffered a heart attack. Newspaper reports the following day listed his condition as satisfactory. By the morning of November 16 he seemed to be improving. But he died that evening at age 59 from an arterial blood clot. Medical staff did not perform CPR for fear that the procedure would rupture Gable's heart, and a defibrillator was not available.

There was speculation that Gable's physically demanding role in "The Misfits" contributed to his sudden death soon after filming was completed. In an interview with Louella Parsons, published soon after Gable's death, Kay Gable said, "It wasn't the physical exertion that killed him. It was the horrible tension, the eternal waiting, waiting, waiting. He waited around forever, for everybody. He'd get so angry that he'd just go ahead and do anything to keep occupied." Monroe said that she and Kay had become close during the filming and would refer to Clark as "Our Man", while Arthur Miller, observing Gable on location, noted, "no hint of affront ever showed on his face".

On March 20, 1961, Kay Gable gave birth to Gable's only son, John Clark Gable, at the same hospital in which her husband had died four months earlier. Marilyn Monroe attended his son's baptism. 

Gable is interred in the Great Mausoleum, Memorial Terrace at Glendale's Forest Lawn Memorial Park.

During the filming of "The Call of the Wild" in early 1935, the film's lead actress, Loretta Young, became pregnant with Gable's child. Their daughter, Judy, was born in November 1935. Those who knew of Gable's paternity widely assumed that the pregnancy was the result of an affair. Eighty years later, Linda Lewis — Young's daughter-in-law — claimed that before her death Young told her that she had been raped by Gable, and though the two had flirted on set, there had been no affair.

Young's pregnancy was hidden in an elaborate scheme, reported devised by Eddie Mannix. While nearing the end of her pregnancy, she took a vacation to Europe for several months. She then returned to the United States to give birth to their daughter in Venice, California. During Young's pregnancy, Gable had spent much time out of the country, but he was in New York City when he received an unsigned telegram that said, "The baby was born, she is beautiful, and has blonde hair." Young and her mother both denied sending the telegram; Loretta believed that Carter Hermann (her sister Polly's husband, who was also Judy's godfather) had sent it.

Judy Lewis was Gable's only child born while he was alive. Nineteen months after the birth, Young claimed to have adopted Judy. The girl grew up resembling Gable very much, including having large ears that stuck out. She went by the name Judy Lewis after her mother married Tom Lewis when Judy was four years old. According to Lewis, Gable visited her home once, when she was 15, asked about her life, and kissed her on her forehead upon leaving. He did not tell her that he was her biological father. Neither Gable nor Young would ever publicly acknowledge the truth about their daughter, but most in Hollywood and some in the general public believed Gable was her father, due, in part, to their strong resemblance and the timing of her birth.

When she was 31 years old and five years after the death of Clark Gable, Lewis finally confronted her mother about her true parentage. Loretta confirmed that she was her biological mother and Gable was her father. Young never publicly acknowledged the fact while she was alive, which she said would be admitting to a mortal sin. However, she finally gave her biographer permission to include the information on the condition that the book not be published until after her death. She died on August 12, 2000, at the age of 87 of ovarian cancer. Judy Lewis died at age 76 on November 25, 2011, also of cancer.

In 1955, Gable married twice divorced Kay Williams, and had a son, John Clark Gable, by her, on March 20, 1961, after his death. John Clark had two children: Kayley Gable (born 1986) and Clark James Gable (born September 20, 1988). Kayley is an actress, while Clark James is currently host of the nationally syndicated reality show "Cheaters".

In a photo essay of Hollywood film stars, "Life" magazine called Gable, "All man... and then some."

Doris Day summed up Gable's unique personality: "He was as masculine as any man I've ever known, and as much a little boy as a grown man could be – it was this combination that had such a devastating effect on women."

Longtime friend, eight-time co-star and on-again, off-again romance Joan Crawford concurred, stating on David Frost's TV show in 1970 that "he was a king wherever he went. He walked like one, he behaved like one, and he was the most masculine man that I have ever met in my life."

Robert Taylor said Gable "was a great, great guy and certainly one of the great stars of all times, if not the greatest. I think that I sincerely doubt that there will ever be another like Clark Gable; he was one of a kind."

In his memoir "Bring on the Empty Horses" David Niven states that Gable, a close friend, was extremely supportive after the sudden, accidental death of Niven's first wife, Primula (Primmie) in 1946. Primmie had supported Gable emotionally after Carole Lombard's death four years earlier: Niven recounts Gable kneeling at Primmie's feet and sobbing while she held and consoled him. Niven also states that Arthur Miller, the author of "The Misfits", had described Gable as "the man who did not know how to hate."

Gable has been criticized for altering critical aspects of a script when he felt that the script would not fit in with his image. Screenwriter Larry Gelbart, as quoted by James Garner once stated that Gable, "...would not go down with the submarine [referring to "Run Silent Run Deep" (1958), where the movie ended differently from the book on which it was based], because Gable doesn't sink."

Eli Wallach, in his autobiography, also states that Wallach's most dramatic scene in "The Misfits" was cut from the movie after it had been filmed over several takes. This scene depicts Wallach's character (who secretly loves the character played by Marilyn Monroe) being emotionally crushed when he visits her, hoping to propose to her, and instead sees her with Gable's character. Both Gable and Monroe are offscreen, and Wallach's heartbreak is indicated by his dropping the rose bouquet he had brought for her. Gable ordered the scene removed because he felt that his character would never steal a woman from another man. Wallach, however, refrains from criticizing Gable, noting that he was professional and considerate in his behavior.

Gable is known to have appeared as an extra in 13 films between 1924 and 1930. He then appeared in a total of 67 theatrically released motion pictures, as himself in 17 "short subject" films, and he narrated and appeared in a World War II propaganda film entitled "Combat America", produced by the United States Army Air Forces.

Warner Bros. cartoons sometimes caricatured Gable. Examples include "Have You Got Any Castles?" (in which his face appears seven times inside the novel "The House of the Seven Gables"), "The Coo-Coo Nut Grove" (in which his ears flap on their own), "Hollywood Steps Out" (in which he follows an enigmatic woman), and "Cats Don't Dance" in which he appears on a billboard promotion for "Gone With The Wind".

The 2003 album "Give Up" by electronic music group The Postal Service includes a song titled "Clark Gable". The song's narrator says he wants love like something in the movies, and includes the lyrics "I kissed you in a style Clark Gable would have admired, I thought it classic."

In the film "Broadway Melody of 1938", Judy Garland (aged 15) sings "You Made Me Love You" while looking at a composite picture of Gable. The opening lines are: "Dear Mr. Gable, I am writing this to you, and I hope that you will read it so you'll know, my heart beats like a hammer, and I stutter and I stammer, every time I see you at the picture show, I guess I'm just another fan of yours, and I thought I'd write and tell you so. You made me love you, I didn't want to do it, I didn't want to do it..."

Bugs Bunny's nonchalant carrot-chewing standing position, as explained by Chuck Jones, Friz Freleng, and Bob Clampett, originated in a scene in the film "It Happened One Night", in which Clark Gable's character leans against a fence, eating carrots rapidly and talking with his mouth full to Claudette Colbert's character. This scene was well known while the film was popular, and viewers at the time likely recognized Bugs Bunny's behavior as satire.

Gable has been portrayed in films by James Brolin in "Gable and Lombard" (1976), Larry Pennell in "" (1980), Edward Winter in "" (1980), Boyd Holister in "Grace Kelly" (1983), Gary Wayne in "Malice in Wonderland" (1985), Gene Daily in "The Rocketeer" (1991), Bruce Hughes and Shayne Greenman in "Blonde" (2001), and Charles Unwin in "Lucy" (2003).





</doc>
<doc id="19672828" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19672828" title="Alec Guinness">
Alec Guinness

Sir Alec Guinness, (born Alec Guinness de Cuffe; 2 April 1914 – 5 August 2000) was an English actor. After an early career on the stage, Guinness was featured in several of the Ealing Comedies, including "The Ladykillers" and "Kind Hearts and Coronets" in which he played nine different characters. He is also known for his six collaborations with David Lean: Herbert Pocket in "Great Expectations" (1946), Fagin in "Oliver Twist" (1948), Col. Nicholson in "The Bridge on the River Kwai" (1957, for which he won the Academy Award for Best Actor), Prince Faisal in "Lawrence of Arabia" (1962), General Yevgraf Zhivago in "Doctor Zhivago" (1965), and Professor Godbole in "A Passage to India" (1984). He is also known for his portrayal of Obi-Wan Kenobi in George Lucas's original "Star Wars" trilogy, receiving a nomination for an Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor.

Guinness was one of three British actors, along with Laurence Olivier and John Gielgud, who made the transition from Shakespearean theatre to blockbuster films immediately after World War II. Guinness served in the Royal Naval Reserve during the war and commanded a landing craft during the invasion of Sicily and Elba. During the war he was granted leave to appear in the stage play "Flare Path" about RAF Bomber Command.

Guinness won an Academy Award, a BAFTA, a Golden Globe and a Tony Award. In 1959, he was knighted by Elizabeth II for services to the arts. He received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame in 1960, the Academy Honorary Award for lifetime achievement in 1980 and the BAFTA Academy Fellowship Award in 1989. Guinness appeared in nine films that featured in the BFI's 100 greatest British films of the 20th century, which included five of Lean's films.
Guinness was born at 155 Lauderdale Mansions South, Lauderdale Road, Maida Vale, as Alec Guinness de Cuffe. His mother's maiden name was Agnes Cuff. She was born 8 December 1890 to Edward Cuff and Mary Ann Benfield. On Guinness's birth certificate, the space for the mother's name shows Agnes de Cuffe. The space for the infant's name (where first names only are given) says Alec Guinness. The column for name and surname of father is blank.

The identity of Guinness's father has never been officially confirmed. From 1875, under English law, when the birth of an illegitimate child was registered, the father's name could be entered on the certificate only if he were present and gave his consent. Guinness himself believed that his father was a Scottish banker, Andrew Geddes (1861–1928), who paid for Guinness's public school education at Fettes College. Geddes occasionally visited Guinness and his mother, posing as an uncle. Guinness's mother later had a three-year marriage to a Scottish army captain named Stiven; his behaviour was often erratic or even violent.

Guinness first worked writing advertising copy. His first job in the theatre was on his 20th birthday, while he was still a drama student, in the play "Libel", which opened at the old King's Theatre, Hammersmith, and then transferred to the Playhouse, where his status was raised from a walk-on to understudying two lines, and his salary increased to £1 a week. He appeared at the Albery Theatre in 1936 at the age of 22, playing the role of Osric in John Gielgud's successful production of "Hamlet". Also in 1936, Guinness signed on with the Old Vic, where he was cast in a series of classic roles. In 1939, he took over for Michael Redgrave as Charleston in a road-show production of Robert Ardrey's "Thunder Rock".

During his time at the Old Vic, he worked with many actors and actresses who would become his friends and frequent co-stars in the future, including Gielgud, Ralph Richardson, Peggy Ashcroft, Anthony Quayle, and Jack Hawkins. An early influence from afar was Stan Laurel, whom Guinness admired.

Guinness continued playing Shakespearean roles throughout his career. In 1937, he played Aumerle in "Richard II" and Lorenzo in "The Merchant of Venice" under the direction of John Gielgud. He starred in a 1938 production of "Hamlet" which won him acclaim on both sides of the Atlantic. He also appeared as Romeo in a production of "Romeo and Juliet" (1939), Andrew Aguecheek in "Twelfth Night", and as Exeter in "Henry V" in 1937, both opposite Laurence Olivier, and Ferdinand in "The Tempest", opposite Gielgud as Prospero. In 1939, he adapted Charles Dickens' novel "Great Expectations" for the stage, playing Herbert Pocket. The play was a success. One of its viewers was a young British film editor, David Lean, who would later have Guinness reprise his role in Lean's 1946 film adaptation of the play.

Guinness served in the Royal Navy Volunteer Reserve in the Second World War, initially as a seaman in 1941, before receiving a commission as a Temporary Sub-lieutenant on 30 April 1942 and a promotion to Temporary Lieutenant the following year. Guinness then commanded a landing craft at the Allied invasion of Sicily, and later ferried supplies and agents to the Yugoslav partisans in the eastern Mediterranean theatre.

During the war, he was granted leave to appear in the Broadway production of Terence Rattigan's play, "Flare Path", about RAF Bomber Command, with Guinness playing the role of Flight Lieutenant Teddy Graham.

Guinness returned to the Old Vic in 1946 and stayed until 1948, playing Abel Drugger in Ben Jonson's "The Alchemist", the Fool in "King Lear" opposite Laurence Olivier in the title role, DeGuiche in "Cyrano de Bergerac" opposite Ralph Richardson in the title role, and finally starring in an Old Vic production as Shakespeare's Richard II. After leaving the Old Vic, he played Eric Birling in J. B. Priestley's "An Inspector Calls" at the New Theatre in October 1946. He played the Uninvited Guest in the Broadway production of T. S. Eliot's "The Cocktail Party" (1950, revived at the Edinburgh Festival in 1968). He played "Hamlet" under his own direction at the New Theatre in the West End in 1951.

Invited by his friend Tyrone Guthrie to join the premiere season of the Stratford Festival of Canada, Guinness lived for a brief time in Stratford, Ontario. On 13 July 1953, Guinness spoke the first lines of the first play produced by the festival, Shakespeare's "Richard III": "Now is the winter of our discontent/Made glorious summer by this sun of York."

Guinness won a Tony Award for his Broadway performance as Welsh poet Dylan Thomas in "Dylan". He next played the title role in "Macbeth" opposite Simone Signoret at the Royal Court Theatre in 1966. Guinness made his final stage performance at the Comedy Theatre in the West End on 30 May 1989, in the play "A Walk in the Woods". In all, between 2 April 1934 and 30 May 1989, he played 77 parts in the theatre.

In films, Guinness was initially associated mainly with the Ealing Comedies, and particularly for playing nine characters in "Kind Hearts and Coronets". Other films from this period included "The Lavender Hill Mob", black comedy "The Ladykillers", and "The Man in the White Suit", with all three ranked among the Best British films. In 1952, director Ronald Neame cast Guinness in his first romantic lead role, opposite Petula Clark in "The Card". In 1951, exhibitors voted him the most popular British star.

Other notable film roles of this period included "The Swan" (1956) with Grace Kelly, in her second-to-last film role; "The Horse's Mouth" (1958) in which Guinness played the part of drunken painter Gulley Jimson, as well as writing the screenplay, for which he was nominated for an Academy Award; the lead in Carol Reed's "Our Man in Havana" (1959); Marcus Aurelius in "The Fall of the Roman Empire" (1964); "The Quiller Memorandum" (1966); Marley's Ghost in "Scrooge" (1970); Charles I in "Cromwell" (1970); Pope Innocent III in Franco Zeffirelli's "Brother Sun, Sister Moon" (1972) and the title role in "" (1973), which he considered his best film performance, though critics disagreed. Another role which is sometimes referred to as one which he considered his best and is so considered by many critics, is that of Colonel Jock Sinclair in "Tunes of Glory" (1960). Guinness also played the role of Jamessir Bensonmum, the blind butler, in the 1976 Neil Simon film "Murder by Death".

Guinness won particular acclaim for his work with director David Lean, which today is his most critically acclaimed work. After appearing in Lean's "Great Expectations" and "Oliver Twist", he was given a starring role opposite William Holden in "The Bridge on the River Kwai". For his performance as Colonel Nicholson, the unyielding British POW commanding officer, Guinness won an Academy Award for Best Actor and a BAFTA Award for Best Actor. Despite a difficult and often hostile relationship, Lean, referring to Guinness as "my good luck charm", continued to cast Guinness in character roles in his later films: Arab leader Prince Feisal in "Lawrence of Arabia"; the title character's half-brother, Bolshevik leader Yevgraf, in "Doctor Zhivago" and Indian mystic Professor Godbole in "A Passage to India". He was also offered a role in Lean's "Ryan's Daughter" (1970) but declined. At that time, Guinness "mistrusted" Lean and considered the formerly close relationship to be strained—although, at his funeral, he recalled that the famed director had been "charming and affable". Guinness appeared in five Lean films that were ranked in the British Film Institute's top 50 greatest British films of the 20th century: 3rd ("Lawrence of Arabia"), 5th ("Great Expectations"), 11th ("The Bridge on the River Kwai"), 27th ("Doctor Zhivago") and 46th ("Oliver Twist").

Guinness's role as Obi-Wan Kenobi in the original "Star Wars" trilogy, beginning in 1977, brought him worldwide recognition to a new generation, as well as Academy Award and Golden Globe nominations. In letters to his friends, Guinness described the film as "fairy tale rubbish" but the film's sense of moral good – and the studio's doubling of his initial salary offer – appealed to him and he agreed to take the part of Kenobi on the condition that he would not have to do any publicity to promote the film. He negotiated a deal for 2.25% of the gross royalties paid to the director, George Lucas, who received one-fifth of the box office takings. This made him very wealthy in his later life. Upon his first viewing of the film, Guinness wrote in his diary, "It's a pretty staggering film as spectacle and technically brilliant. Exciting, very noisy and warm-hearted. The battle scenes at the end go on for five minutes too long, I feel, and some of the dialogue is excruciating and much of it is lost in noise, but it remains a vivid experience."

Guinness soon became unhappy with being identified with the part and expressed dismay at the fan following that the "Star Wars" trilogy attracted. In the DVD commentary of the original "Star Wars", Lucas says that Guinness was not happy with the script rewrite in which Obi-Wan is killed. Guinness said in a 1999 interview that it was actually his idea to kill off Obi-Wan, persuading Lucas that it would make him a stronger character and that Lucas agreed to the idea. Guinness stated in the interview, "What I didn't tell Lucas was that I just couldn't go on speaking those bloody awful, banal lines. I'd had enough of the mumbo jumbo." He went on to say that he "shrivelled up" every time "Star Wars" was mentioned to him.

Although Guinness disliked the fame that followed work he did not hold in high esteem, Lucas and fellow cast members Mark Hamill, Harrison Ford, Kenny Baker, Anthony Daniels and Carrie Fisher have spoken highly of his courtesy and professionalism, on and off the set. Lucas credited him with inspiring cast and crew to work harder, saying that Guinness contributed significantly to achieving completion of the filming. Guinness was quoted as saying that the royalties he obtained from working on the films gave him "no complaints; let me leave it by saying I can live for the rest of my life in the reasonably modest way I am now used to, that I have no debts and I can afford to refuse work that doesn't appeal to me." In his autobiography, "Blessings In Disguise", Guinness tells an imaginary interviewer "Blessed be "Star Wars"", regarding the income it provided.

In the final volume of the book "A Positively Final Appearance" (1997), Guinness recounts grudgingly giving an autograph to a young fan who claimed to have watched "Star Wars" over a hundred times, on the condition that the boy promise to stop watching the film because "this is going to be an ill effect on your life". The fan was stunned at first but later thanked him (though some sources say it went differently). Guinness is quoted as saying: "'Well', I said, 'do you think you could promise never to see "Star Wars" again?' He burst into tears. His mother drew herself up to an immense height. 'What a dreadful thing to say to a child!' she barked, and dragged the poor kid away. Maybe she was right but I just hope the lad, now in his thirties, is not living in a fantasy world of second hand, childish banalities." Guinness grew so tired of modern audiences apparently knowing him only for his role of Obi-Wan Kenobi that he would throw away the mail he received from "Star Wars" fans without reading it.

From the 1970s, Guinness made regular appearances on UK television, including the part of George Smiley in the serialisations of two novels by John le Carré: "Tinker Tailor Soldier Spy" and "Smiley's People". He twice won the British Academy Television Award for Best Actor for the roles, and Le Carré was so impressed by Guinness's performance as Smiley that he based his characterisation of Smiley in subsequent novels on Guinness. One of Guinness's last appearances was in the BBC drama "Eskimo Day" (1996).

Guinness won the Academy Award for Best Actor and the BAFTA Award for Best Actor in 1957 for his role in "The Bridge on the River Kwai" after having been unsuccessfully nominated for an Oscar in 1952 for his performance in "The Lavender Hill Mob". He was nominated in 1958 for the Academy Award for Best Writing, Screenplay Based on Material from Another Medium, for his screenplay adapted from Joyce Cary's novel "The Horse's Mouth". He was nominated for Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor for his role as Obi-Wan Kenobi in "Star Wars" in 1977. He received an Academy Honorary Award for lifetime achievement in 1980. In 1988, he received an Academy Award nomination for Best Supporting Actor for "Little Dorrit". He received the BAFTA Academy Fellowship Award for lifetime achievement in 1989.

For his theatre work, he received an Evening Standard Award for his performance as T. E. Lawrence in "Ross" and a Tony Award for his Broadway turn as Dylan Thomas in "Dylan". Guinness received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame at 1559 Vine Street on 8 February 1960. Guinness was appointed a Commander of the Order of the British Empire (CBE) in the 1955 Birthday Honours, and was knighted by Elizabeth II in the 1959 New Year Honours. In 1991, he received an honorary doctorate from Cambridge University. Guinness was appointed a Companion of Honour in the 1994 Birthday Honours for services to Drama.

Guinness married the artist, playwright, and actress Merula Sylvia Salaman (1914–2000) in 1938; in 1940, they had a son, Matthew Guinness, who later became an actor. The family lived at Steep Marsh in Hampshire.

In his biography, "Alec Guinness: The Unknown", Garry O'Connor reports that Guinness was arrested and fined 10 guineas (£10.50) for a homosexual act in a public lavatory in Liverpool in 1946. Guinness is said to have avoided publicity by giving his name to police and court as "Herbert Pocket", the name of the character he played in "Great Expectations". This suggestion was not made until April, 2001, eight months after his death, when a BBC News article claimed that Guinness was in fact bisexual and that he had kept his sexuality private from the public eye; only his closest friends and family members knew he had sexual relationships with men.

While serving in the Royal Navy, Guinness had planned to become an Anglican priest. In 1954, while he was filming "Father Brown" in Burgundy, Guinness, who was in costume as a Catholic priest, was mistaken for a real priest by a local child. Guinness was far from fluent in French, and the child apparently did not notice that Guinness did not understand him but took his hand and chattered while the two strolled; the child then waved and trotted off. The confidence and affection the clerical attire appeared to inspire in the boy left a deep impression on the actor. When their son was ill with polio at the age of 11, Guinness began visiting a church to pray. A few years later in 1956, Guinness converted to the Roman Catholic Church. His wife, who was of paternal Sephardi Jewish descent, followed suit in 1957 while he was in Sri Lanka filming "The Bridge on the River Kwai", and she informed him only after the event. Every morning, Guinness recited a verse from Psalm 143, "Cause me to hear your loving kindness in the morning".

Guinness died on the night of 5 August 2000, from liver cancer, at Midhurst in West Sussex. He had been receiving hospital treatment for glaucoma, and had recently also been diagnosed with prostate cancer. He was interred at Petersfield, Hampshire.

Guinness wrote three volumes of a best-selling autobiography, beginning with "Blessings in Disguise" in 1985, followed by "My Name Escapes Me" in 1996, and "A Positively Final Appearance" in 1999. He recorded each of them as an audiobook. Shortly after his death, Lady Guinness asked the couple's close friend and fellow Catholic, novelist Piers Paul Read, to write Guinness's official biography. It was published in 2002.

For a number of years, British film exhibitors voted Guinness among the most popular stars in Britain at the box office via an annual poll in the "Motion Picture Herald".




</doc>
<doc id="325191" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=325191" title="Jamie Foxx">
Jamie Foxx

Eric Marlon Bishop (born December 13, 1967), known professionally as Jamie Foxx, is an American actor, singer, songwriter, producer, and comedian. He won an Academy Award for Best Actor, BAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Leading Role, and a Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy, for his portrayal of Ray Charles in the 2004 biographical film "Ray". That same year, he was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor for his role in the crime film "Collateral". As of spring 2017, Foxx serves as host and executive producer of the new Fox game show "Beat Shazam".

Other acting roles include Staff Sergeant Sykes in "Jarhead" (2005), record executive Curtis Taylor, Jr. in "Dreamgirls" (2006), Detective Ricardo Tubbs in the 2006 film adaptation of TV series "Miami Vice", the title role in the film "Django Unchained" (2012), the supervillain Electro in "The Amazing Spider-Man 2" (2014), and gangster Bats / Leon Jefferson III in "Baby Driver" (2017). Foxx also starred in the sketch comedy show "In Living Color" and his own television show from 1996 to 2001, the sitcom "The Jamie Foxx Show", in which he played Jamie King, Jr. Foxx also starred in the 2014 film "Annie", in which he played Will Stacks.

Foxx is also a Grammy Award-winning musician, producing four albums which have charted in the top ten of the US "Billboard" 200: "Unpredictable" (2005), which topped the chart, "Intuition" (2008), "Best Night of My Life" (2010), and " "(2015).

Eric Marlon Bishop was born in Terrell, Texas on December 13, 1967. He is the son of Darrell Bishop (renamed Shahid Abdula following his conversion to Islam), who sometimes worked as a stockbroker, and Louise Annette Talley Dixon. Shortly after his birth, Foxx was adopted and raised by his mother's adoptive parents, Esther Marie (Nelson), a domestic worker and nursery operator, and Mark Talley, a yard worker. He has had little contact with his birth parents, who were not part of his upbringing. Foxx was raised in the black quarter of Terrell, which at the time was a racially segregated community. He has often acknowledged his grandmother's influence in his life as one of the greatest reasons for his success.

Foxx began playing the piano when he was five years old. He had a strict Baptist upbringing, and as a teenager he was a part-time pianist and choir leader in Terrell's New Hope Baptist Church. His natural talent for telling jokes was already in evidence as a third grader, when his teacher would use him as a reward: if the class behaved, Foxx would tell them jokes. Foxx attended Terrell High School, where he received top grades and played basketball and football (as quarterback). His ambition was to play for the Dallas Cowboys, and he was the first player in the school's history to pass for more than 1,000 yards. He also sang in a band called Leather and Lace. After completing high school, Foxx received a scholarship to United States International University, where he studied classical music and composition.

Foxx first told jokes at a comedy club's open mic night in 1989, after accepting a girlfriend's dare. When he found that female comedians were often called first to perform, he changed his name to Jamie Foxx, feeling that it was a name ambiguous enough to disallow any biases. He chose his surname as a tribute to the black comedian Redd Foxx. Foxx joined the cast of "In Living Color" in 1991, where his recurrent character Wanda also shared a name with Redd's friend and co-worker, LaWanda Page. Following a recurring role in the comedy-drama sitcom "Roc", Foxx went on to star in his own sitcom "The Jamie Foxx Show", from 1996 to 2001.

Foxx made his film debut in the 1992 comedy "Toys". His first dramatic role came in Oliver Stone's 1999 film "Any Given Sunday", where he was cast as a hard-partying American football player, partly because of his own football background. In 2001, Foxx starred opposite Will Smith in Michael Mann's biographical drama Ali. Three years later, Foxx played taxi driver Max Durocher in the film "Collateral" alongside Tom Cruise, for which he received outstanding reviews and a nomination for the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor.

In 1994, Foxx released an album (on the Fox record label) entitled "Peep This", which was not commercially successful. In 2003, Foxx made a cameo in Benzino's music video for "Would You", which features LisaRaye McCoy and Mario Winans.

In 2003, Foxx featured on the rapper Twista's song, "Slow Jamz", together with Kanye West, which reached #1 on the US "Billboard" Hot 100 singles chart and #3 on the UK Singles chart. His second collaboration with Kanye West, "Gold Digger," in which Foxx sang the Ray Charles-influenced "I Got a Woman" hook, then went straight to #1 on the "Billboard" Hot 100, remaining there for 10 weeks. In 2005, Foxx featured on the single "Georgia" by Atlanta rappers Ludacris and Field Mob, which sampled Ray Charles' hit "Georgia on My Mind".

Foxx would also portray Ray Charles in the biographical film "Ray" (2004), for which he won the Academy Award for Best Actor and the BAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Leading Role. Foxx is the second male in history to receive two acting Oscar nominations in the same year for two different movies, "Collateral" and "Ray" (the only other male actor to achieve this feat being Al Pacino). In 2005, Foxx was invited to join the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences.

Foxx released his second studio album, "Unpredictable", in December 2005. It debuted at #2, selling 598,000 copies in its first week, rising to #1 the following week and selling an additional 200,000 copies. To date, the album has sold 1.98 million copies in the United States, and was certified double Platinum by the RIAA. The album also charted on the UK Albums Chart, where it peaked at #9. Foxx became the fourth artist to have both won an Academy Award for an acting role and to have achieved a #1 album in the U.S, joining Frank Sinatra, Bing Crosby and Barbra Streisand. Foxx's first single from the album, the title track "Unpredictable" (featuring Ludacris), peaked in the "Billboard" Hot 100 Top 10 singles and also made the UK Top 20 singles chart; the track samples "Wildflower" by New Birth. The second US single from the album was "DJ Play a Love Song," which reunited Foxx with Twista. In the UK, the second single was "Extravaganza", which saw Foxx once again collaborate with Kanye West, although Foxx did not feature in the song's music video.
At the 2006 Black Entertainment Television (BET) Awards, Foxx won Best Duet/Collaboration with Kanye West for "Gold Digger" and tied with Mary J. Blige's "Be Without You" for Video of the Year. On December 8, 2006, Foxx received four Grammy Award nominations, which included Best R&B Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocals for "Love Changes" featuring Mary J. Blige, Best R&B Album for "Unpredictable", Best Rap Performance by a Duo or Group for "Georgia" by Ludacris & Field Mob featuring Jamie Foxx, and Best Rap/Sung Collaboration for "Unpredictable" featuring Ludacris.

Following on from these successes, Foxx went on to appear in the box-office hits "Jarhead", "Miami Vice" and "Dreamgirls", which lifted his profile even higher as a bankable star in Hollywood.

2007 brought him the lead role in the action thriller film "The Kingdom" opposite Chris Cooper, Jason Bateman, Jennifer Garner and Ashraf Barhom. In September 2007, Foxx was awarded a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame: "[it was] one of the most amazing days of my life," said Foxx. In April 2009, Foxx played the lead role in the dramatic film "The Soloist". A few months later in October 2009, he played a starring role alongside Gerard Butler in the thriller "Law Abiding Citizen".

Foxx released his third album titled "Intuition" in 2008, featuring Kanye West, T.I., Ne-Yo, Lil' Kim and T-Pain. The album's first single, "Just Like Me" featuring T.I., was promoted by a video directed by Brett Ratner which featured an appearance by actress Taraji P. Henson. The second single "Blame It" featured T-Pain and became a top 5 single on the "Billboard" Hot 100 and a number-one single on the Billboard Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs chart. The "Blame It" music video, directed by Hype Williams, features cameo appearances by Forest Whitaker, Samuel L. Jackson, Ron Howard, Quincy Jones and his "Jarhead" co-star Jake Gyllenhaal, amongst others.

Foxx's musical career has also included a number of collaborations. In 2007, he recorded the song "She Goes All the Way" with country superstars Rascal Flatts for their "Still Feels Good" album. Foxx performed backing vocals for artist/songwriter Tank. He featured alongside The-Dream on Plies' "Please Excuse My Hands." He also appeared alongside Fabolous on the remix of Ne-Yo's "Miss Independent". Foxx collaborated with rapper The Game on the track "Around the World". Foxx also featured on T.I.'s single "Live in the Sky" from the album "King".

On January 22, 2007, Foxx launched The Foxxhole, a channel on Sirius Satellite Radio featuring talk-radio programs, stand-up comedy albums and music primarily by African-American performers, as well as much of Foxx's own material. Foxx's own talk-radio variety program "The Jamie Foxx Show" airs Friday evenings on The Foxxhole with guests including musicians, actors and fellow comedians; co-hosts have included Johnny Mack, Speedy, Claudia Jordan, The Poetess, Lewis Dix, Yvette Wilson, T.D.P and Tyrin Turner. On the April 17, 2009 episode of "The Jamie Foxx Show", Foxx and his co-hosts made several sexually suggestive and disparaging jokes regarding the teenage singer Miley Cyrus. Several days later Foxx issued a public apology on "The Tonight Show with Jay Leno" in response to growing public outcry and televised criticism by Cyrus's father, country singer Billy Ray Cyrus.

On April 6, 2009, Foxx, a longtime fan of country music, performed the George Strait song "You Look So Good in Love" at the George Strait Artist of the Decade All-Star Concert. Jamie Foxx hosted the 2009 BET Awards ceremony on June 28, 2009, which featured several tributes to pop star Michael Jackson, who had died three days prior to the show. As well as performing "Blame It" with T-Pain and "She Got Her Own" with Ne-Yo and Fabolous, Foxx opened the show with a rendition of Jackson's "Beat It" dance routine and closed the show with a cover of The Jackson 5's "I'll Be There" with Ne-Yo. "We want to celebrate this black man. He belongs to us and we shared him with everybody else.", said Foxx during the ceremony.

In April 2011, Foxx voiced Nico, a canary in the movie "Rio". During the summer of 2011, Foxx was involved as a producer in "In the Flow with Affion Crockett" on Fox.

Foxx released his fourth album, "Best Night of My Life", on December 21, 2010, featuring the singles "Winner" (featuring Justin Timberlake and T.I.), "Living Better Now" (featuring rapper Rick Ross) and "Fall for Your Type" (featuring rapper Drake). On October 7, the RCA Music Group announced that it was disbanding J Records along with Arista Records and Jive Records, meaning that all artists (including Foxx) previously signed to the three labels will release their future material on the RCA Records brand. In 2011, Jamie Foxx also featured on the rapper Pitbull's album "Planet Pit", in the song "Where Do We Go".

In 2012, Foxx starred in the title role of the Quentin Tarantino written and directed "Django Unchained". Foxx starred alongside his "Ray" co-star Kerry Washington, as well as Christoph Waltz, Leonardo DiCaprio and Samuel L. Jackson. In an interview about "Django Unchained", Foxx told "Vibe" magazine: "As a black person it's always racial. ... when I get home my other homies are like how was your day? Well, I only had to be white for at least eight hours today, [or] I only had to be white for four hours." The filming was emotional as Foxx said, "It’s tough shooting when you’re in plantation row and that’s where your ancestors were persecuted and killed."

On November 25, 2012 at BET’s "Soul Train Awards", Foxx joked: "It's like church in here. First of all, giving honor to God and our lord and savior Barack Obama." The joke led to condemnation from some Christians, to which Foxx responded: "I'm a comic [and] sometimes I think people get a little too tight." While hosting "Saturday Night Live" on December 8, 2012 to promote "Django Unchained", Foxx joked about being excited "to kill all the white people in the movie". Appearing at the 2013 NAACP Image Awards, Foxx praised the achievements of black people, saying that "black people are the most talented people in the world".

In 2013, Foxx was cast as President James Sawyer in "White House Down" alongside Channing Tatum. The following year, Foxx appeared in "The Amazing Spider-Man 2" as the villain Electro, and co-starred with Quvenzhané Wallis in "Annie", Sony's Will Smith and Jay-Z produced update of the comic strip-turned-musical. Director Oliver Stone has also confirmed that Foxx will play Martin Luther King Jr. in his upcoming Steven Spielberg-produced biopic. His October 2014 Deja Vu duet with Dionne Warwick appears on the "Feels So Good" album released by Warwick.

Foxx released his fifth studio album, "", on May 18, 2015. It debuted atop the Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums charts and at No. 10 on the "Billboard" 200. In 2015, Foxx's voice was featured in the chorus on the Ariana Grande song, "Focus". Beginning with its debut on May 25, 2017, Foxx is now the host and executive producer of the Fox game show "Beat Shazam", which is described as a hip, 21st-century update of the popular mid- to late-20th century ubiquitous radio and TV game show "Name That Tune". Three sets of two partners try to beat the computer "Shazam" in correctly identifying the titles of popular songs in the shortest amount of time in incrementally higher amounts of money, with one team eventually vying for a potential prize of $1 million.

In April 2003, Foxx was involved in an incident with two police officers who were attempting to escort him and his sister out of Harrah's casino in New Orleans. Employees claimed the Foxx party had failed to show identification upon entry. Originally charged with trespassing, disturbing the peace, battery on police officers and resisting arrest, Foxx pleaded no contest to disturbing the peace in exchange for the other charges being dropped, and was sentenced to a six-month suspended jail term with two years of probation and a $1,500 fine.

Foxx has two daughters: Corinne Bishop (born 1994) and Annalise (born August 2009). Corinne made her formal debut at the Bal des débutantes in November 2014 and was named Miss Golden Globe 2016 on November 18, 2015.

In 2008, Foxx filmed a public service announcement for Do Something to promote food drives in local communities.

Foxx has been involved in feuds with co-stars LL Cool J and Colin Farrell.

On January 18, 2016, Foxx rescued a young man from a burning vehicle that crashed outside his home. The driver, Brett Kyle, was driving his truck "at a high rate of speed" when the truck left the road, traveled into a drainage ditch, and rolled over multiple times. Kyle was arrested for driving under the influence of alcohol. 

Foxx's daughter, Corinne Bishop Foxx, is scheduled to co-star in the second season of Beat Shazam on Fox Broadcasting Company sometime in 2018. She will replace DJ October Gonzalez from the first season of the show.







</doc>
<doc id="14045" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14045" title="Humphrey Bogart">
Humphrey Bogart

Humphrey DeForest Bogart (; December 25, 1899January 14, 1957) was an American screen and stage actor whose performances in 1940s noir films such as "The Maltese Falcon", "Casablanca", and "The Big Sleep" earned him status as a cultural icon. 

Bogart began acting in 1921 after a hitch in the U.S. Navy in World War I and little success in various jobs in finance and the production side of the theater. Gradually he became a regular in Broadway shows in the 1920s and 1930s. When the stock market crash of 1929 reduced the demand for plays, Bogart turned to film. His first great success was as Duke Mantee in "The Petrified Forest" (1936), and this led to a period of typecasting as a gangster with films such as "Angels with Dirty Faces" (1938).

Bogart's breakthrough as a leading man came in 1941 with "High Sierra" and "The Maltese Falcon." The next year, his performance in "Casablanca" (1943; Oscar nomination) raised him to the peak of his profession and, at the same time, cemented his trademark film persona, that of the hard-boiled cynic who ultimately shows his noble side. Other successes followed, including "To Have and Have Not" (1944), "The Big Sleep" (1946), "Dark Passage" (1947), and "Key Largo" (1948), all four with his wife Lauren Bacall; "The Treasure of the Sierra Madre" (1948); "In a Lonely Place" (1950); "The African Queen" (1951; Oscar winner); "Sabrina" (1954); "The Caine Mutiny" (1954; Oscar nomination); and "We're No Angels" (1955). His last film was "The Harder They Fall" (1956).

During a film career of almost 30 years, Bogart appeared in more than 75 feature films. In 1999, the American Film Institute ranked Bogart as the greatest male star of Classic American cinema. Over his career, he received three Academy Award nominations for Best Actor, winning one (for "The African Queen").

Bogart was born on Christmas Day, 1899, in New York City, the eldest child of Belmont DeForest Bogart (1867 – 1934) and Maud Humphrey (1868 – 1940). Belmont was the only child of the unhappy marriage of Adam Watkins Bogart, a Canandaigua, New York innkeeper, and his wife, Julia, a wealthy heiress. The name "Bogart" derived from the Dutch surname "Bogaert". Belmont and Maud married in June 1898; he was a Presbyterian, of English and Dutch descent, and she was an Episcopalian of English heritage, and a descendant of "Mayflower" passenger John Howland. Young Humphrey was raised in the Episcopal faith, but was non-practicing for most of his adult life.

The precise date of Bogart's birth was long a matter of dispute, but has been cleared up. Warner Bros listed his birthdate as Christmas Day, 1899, throughout his career; but film historian Clifford McCarty later maintained that the Warner publicity department had altered it from January 23, 1900 "...to foster the view that a man born on Christmas Day couldn't really be as villainous as he appeared to be on screen". The "corrected" January birthdate subsequently appeared—and in some cases, remains—in many otherwise authoritative sources. Biographers A.M. Sperber and Eric Lax documented, however, that Bogart always celebrated his birthday on December 25, and consistently listed it as such on official records, such as his marriage license.
Lauren Bacall confirmed in her autobiography that his birthday was always celebrated on Christmas Day, adding that he joked that he was cheated out of a present every year because of it. Sperber and Lax also noted that a birth announcement, printed in the "Ontario County Times" on January 10, 1900, effectively rules out the possibility of a January 23 birthdate; and state and federal census records from 1900 report a Christmas 1899 birthdate as well.

Bogart's father, Belmont, was a cardiopulmonary surgeon. His mother, Maud, was a commercial illustrator who received her art training in New York and France, including study with James McNeill Whistler. Later she became art director of the fashion magazine "The Delineator" and a militant suffragette. She used a drawing of baby Humphrey in a well-known advertising campaign for Mellins Baby Food. In her prime, she made over $50,000 a year, then a vast sum and far more than her husband's $20,000. The Bogarts lived in a fashionable Upper West Side apartment, and had an elegant cottage on a 55-acre estate on Canandaigua Lake in upstate New York. As a youngster, Humphrey's gang of friends at the lake would put on theatricals.

Humphrey had two younger sisters, Frances ("Pat") and Catherine Elizabeth ("Kay"). His parents were busy in their careers and frequently fought. Very formal, they showed little emotion towards their children. Maud told her offspring to call her "Maud" not "Mother", and showed little if any physical affection for them. When pleased she "[c]lapped you on the shoulder, almost the way a man does", Bogart recalled. "I was brought up very unsentimentally but very straightforwardly. A kiss, in our family, was an event. Our mother and father didn't glug over my two sisters and me."

As a boy, Bogart was teased for his curls, tidiness, the "cute" pictures his mother had him pose for, the Little Lord Fauntleroy clothes she dressed him in, and even for the name "Humphrey". From his father, Bogart inherited a tendency to needle, fondness for fishing, lifelong love of boating, and an attraction to strong-willed women.

Bogart attended the private Delancey School until fifth grade, then the prestigious Trinity School. He was an indifferent, sullen student who showed no interest in after-school activities. Later he went to the equally elite boarding school Phillips Academy, where he was admitted based on family connections. His parents hoped he would go on to Yale, but in 1918 Bogart was expelled. Several reasons have been given: one claims that it was for throwing the headmaster (or a groundskeeper) into Rabbit Pond on campus. Another cites smoking, drinking, poor academic performance, and possibly some inappropriate comments made to the staff. A third has him withdrawn by his father for failing to improve his grades. Whatever caused his premature departure, his parents were deeply dismayed and rued their failed plans for his future.

With no viable career options, Bogart followed his passion for the sea and enlisted in the United States Navy in the spring of 1918. He recalled later, "At eighteen, war was great stuff. Paris! Sexy French girls! Hot damn!" Bogart is recorded as a model sailor who spent most of his sea time after the Armistice ferrying troops back from Europe.

It was during his naval stint that Bogart may have received his trademark scar and developed his characteristic lisp, though the actual circumstances are unclear. In one account his lip was cut by shrapnel when his ship, the "", was shelled, although some claim Bogart did not make it to sea until after the Armistice had been signed. Another version, which Bogart's long-time friend, author Nathaniel Benchley, holds to, is that Bogart was injured while taking a prisoner to Portsmouth Naval Prison in Kittery, Maine.

Changing trains in Boston the handcuffed prisoner allegedly asked Bogart for a cigarette, then while Bogart looked for a match, the prisoner smashed him across the mouth with the cuffs, cutting Bogart's lip and fleeing. Recaptured, the prisoner was taken to jail. An alternative version has Bogart struck in the mouth by a handcuff loosened while freeing his charge, the other still around the prisoner's wrist.

By the time Bogart was treated by a doctor, a scar had already formed. David Niven said that when he first asked Bogart about his scar, he said it was caused by a childhood accident. "Goddamn doctor", Bogart later told Niven, "instead of stitching it up, he screwed it up." Niven claims the stories that Bogart got the scar during wartime were made up by the studios to inject glamour.

His post-service physical makes no mention of the lip scar, even though it mentions many smaller scars. When actress Louise Brooks met Bogart in 1924, he had some scar-tissue on his upper lip, which Brooks said that Bogart may have had partially repaired before entering films in 1930. She believed his scar had nothing to do with his distinctive speech pattern, and said his "lip wound gave him no speech impediment, either before or after it was mended. Over the years, Bogart practiced all kinds of lip gymnastics, accompanied by nasal tones, snarls, lisps and slurs. His painful wince, his leer, his fiendish grin were the most accomplished ever seen on film."

Bogart returned home to find his father suffering from poor health, his medical practice faltering, and much of the family's wealth lost on bad investments in timber. During his naval days, Bogart's character and values developed independently of family influence, and he began to rebel somewhat against their values. He came to be a liberal who hated pretensions, phonies, and snobs, and at times defied conventional behavior and authority, traits he displayed in both life and the movies. He did not, however, forsake good manners, articulateness, punctuality, modesty, and a dislike of being touched. After his naval service, he worked as a shipper and then bond salesman. He joined the Coast Guard Reserve.

Bogart resumed his friendship with boyhood pal Bill Brady, Jr., whose father had show business connections. Eventually Bogart got an office job working for William A. Brady Sr.'s new company, World Films. Bogart was able to try his hand at screenwriting, directing, and production, but excelled at none. For a while he was stage manager for Brady's daughter Alice's play "A Ruined Lady". A few months later he made his stage debut as a Japanese butler in Alice's 1921 play "Drifting", nervously speaking one line of dialog. Several appearances followed in her subsequent plays.

While Bogart had been raised to believe that acting was beneath a gentleman, he liked the late hours actors kept and enjoyed the attention gotten on stage. He stated, "I was born to be indolent and this was the softest of rackets." He spent a lot of his free time in speakeasies and became a heavy drinker. A barroom brawl during this time joins the list of purported causes of Bogart's lip damage, and coincides better with the Brooks account.

Preferring to learn as he went, Bogart never took acting lessons. He was persistent and worked steadily at his craft, appearing in at least seventeen Broadway productions between 1922 and 1935. He played juveniles or romantic second-leads in drawing room comedies, and is said to have been the first actor to ask "Tennis, anyone?" on stage. Critic Alexander Woollcott wrote of Bogart's early work that he "is what is usually and mercifully described as inadequate." Some reviews were kinder.

Heywood Broun, reviewing "Nerves" wrote, "Humphrey Bogart gives the most effective performance ... both dry and fresh, if that be possible". He played juvenile lead, reporter Gregory Brown, in the comedy "Meet the Wife", written by Lynn Starling, which had a successful run of 232 performances at the Klaw Theatre from November 1923 through July 1924. Bogart loathed these trivial, effeminate parts he had to play early in his career, calling them "White Pants Willie" roles.

Early in his career, while playing double roles in the play "Drifting" at the Playhouse Theatre in 1922, Bogart met actress Helen Menken. They were married on May 20, 1926, at the Gramercy Park Hotel in New York City. Divorced on November 18, 1927, they remained friends. In the divorce filing, Menken avers that Bogart valued his career more than marital happiness, also citing neglect and abuse. On April 3, 1928, he married Mary Philips, whom he'd met when they appeared in the play "Nerves" during its very brief run at the Comedy Theatre in September 1924, at her mother's apartment in Hartford, Connecticut.

After the stock market crash of 1929, stage production dropped off sharply, and many of the more photogenic actors headed for Hollywood. Bogart's film debut was with Helen Hayes in the 1928 two-reeler "The Dancing Town", of which a complete copy has never been found. He also appeared with Joan Blondell and Ruth Etting in a Vitaphone short, "Broadway's Like That" (1930) which was re-discovered in 1963.

Bogart then signed a contract with Fox Film Corporation for $750 a week. There he met Spencer Tracy, a serious Broadway actor whom Bogart liked and admired, and they became close friends and drinking companions. It was Tracy, in 1930, who first called him "Bogie". Tracy made his film debut in the only film in which he and Bogart appeared together, John Ford's early sound film "Up the River" (1930). Both had major roles as inmates. Tracy received top billing and Bogart's face was featured on the film's posters instead of Tracy's.

Bogart then had a minor supporting role in "Bad Sister" with Bette Davis in 1931. Decades later, Tracy and Bogart planned to make "The Desperate Hours" together, but both sought top billing, so Tracy dropped out and was replaced by Fredric March.

Bogart shuttled back and forth between Hollywood and the New York stage from 1930 to 1935, suffering long periods without work. His parents had separated, his father dying in 1934 in debt, which Bogart eventually paid off. Bogart inherited his father's gold ring which he always wore, even in many of his films. At his father's deathbed, Bogart finally told him how much he loved him. His second marriage was on the rocks, and he was less than happy with his acting career. He became depressed, irritable, and drank heavily.

Bogart starred in the Broadway play "Invitation to a Murder" at the Theatre Masque, now the John Golden Theatre, in 1934. The producer Arthur Hopkins heard the play from off-stage and sent for Bogart to play escaped murderer Duke Mantee in Robert E. Sherwood's new play, "The Petrified Forest". Hopkins recalled:

The play had 197 performances at the Broadhurst Theatre in New York in 1935. Leslie Howard, though, was the star. "New York Times" critic Brooks Atkinson said of the play, "a peach ... a roaring Western melodrama ... Humphrey Bogart does the best work of his career as an actor." Bogart said the play "marked my deliverance from the ranks of the sleek, sybaritic, stiff-shirted, swallow-tailed 'smoothies' to which I seemed condemned to life." However, he was still feeling insecure.

Warner Bros. bought the screen rights to "The Petrified Forest". The play seemed perfect for the studio, which was famous for its socially realistic, urban, low-budget action pictures, especially for a public entranced by real-life criminals like John Dillinger (whom Bogart resembled) and Dutch Schultz. Bette Davis and Leslie Howard were cast. Howard, who held production rights, made it clear he wanted Bogart to star with him.

The studio tested several Hollywood veterans for the Duke Mantee role, and chose Edward G. Robinson, who had first-rank star appeal and was due to make a film to fulfill his expensive contract. Bogart cabled news of this to Howard in Scotland, who replied: "Att: Jack Warner Insist Bogart Play Mantee No Bogart No Deal L.H.". When Warner Bros. saw Howard would not budge, they gave in and cast Bogart. Jack Warner, famous for butting heads with his stars, tried to get Bogart to adopt a stage name, but Bogart stubbornly refused.

The film was highly successful, earning $500,000 at the box office, and making Bogart a star. He never forgot Howard's favor, and in 1952 named his only daughter "Leslie Howard Bogart" after Howard, who had died in World War II under mysterious circumstances. Robert E. Sherwood remained a close friend of Bogart's.

The film version of "The Petrified Forest" was released in 1936. Bogart's performance was called "brilliant", "compelling", and "superb." Despite his success in an "A movie," Bogart received a tepid twenty-six-week contract at $550 per week and was typecast as a gangster in a series of "B movie" crime dramas. Bogart was proud of his success, but the fact that it came from playing a gangster weighed on him. He once said: "I can't get in a mild discussion without turning it into an argument. There must be something in my tone of voice, or this arrogant face—something that antagonizes everybody. Nobody likes me on sight. I suppose that's why I'm cast as the heavy."

Bogart's roles were not only repetitive, but physically demanding and draining (studios were not yet air-conditioned), and his regimented, tightly scheduled job at Warners was anything but the indolent and "peachy" actor's life he hoped for. However, he was always professional and generally respected by other actors. He used these "B movie" years to start developing his enduring film persona—the wounded, stoical, cynical, charming, vulnerable, self-mocking loner with a code of honor.

In spite of his success, Warner Bros. had no interest in making Bogart a top star. Shooting on a new movie might begin days or only hours after the previous one wrapped. The studio system, then at its most entrenched, restricted actors to their home lot, with only occasional loan-outs. Any actor who refused a role could be suspended without pay. Bogart disliked the roles chosen for him, but he worked steadily. Between 1936 and 1940 he averaged a movie every two months, at times working on two simultaneously.

Amenities at Warners were few compared to the prestigious Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer. Bogart thought that the Warners wardrobe department was cheap, and often wore his own suits in his movies. In "High Sierra", Bogart used his own pet dog Zero to play his character's dog, Pard. Bogart's disputes with Warner Bros. over roles and money were similar to those the studio waged with other high-spirited, less-than-obedient stars such as Bette Davis, James Cagney, Errol Flynn, and Olivia de Havilland.

The leading men ahead of Bogart at Warner Bros. included not only such marquee names as James Cagney and Edward G. Robinson, but also journeymen leads such as Victor McLaglen, George Raft, and Paul Muni. Most of the studio's better movie scripts went to them, leaving Bogart with what was left. He made films like "Racket Busters", "San Quentin", and "You Can't Get Away with Murder". The only substantial leading role he got during this period was in "Dead End" (1937), while loaned to Samuel Goldwyn, where he portrayed a gangster modeled after Baby Face Nelson.

Bogart played violent roles so often that in Nevil Shute's 1939 novel "What Happened to the Corbetts" the protagonist, when asked whether he knows how to operate an automatic weapon, jokes "I've seen Humphrey Bogart with one often enough ...". He did play a variety of interesting supporting roles, such as in "Angels with Dirty Faces" (1938) (in which his character got shot by James Cagney's). Bogart was gunned down on film repeatedly by Cagney and Edward G. Robinson, among others. In "Black Legion" (1937), for a change, he played a good man caught up and destroyed by a racist organization, a movie Graham Greene described as "intelligent and exciting, if rather earnest".

In 1938, Warner Bros. put Bogart in a "hillbilly musical" called "Swing Your Lady" as a wrestling promoter; he later apparently considered this his worst film performance. In 1939, Bogart played a mad scientist in "The Return of Doctor X", his only horror film. He cracked, "If it'd been Jack Warner's blood ... I wouldn't have minded so much. The trouble was they were drinking mine and I was making this stinking movie." During this time his wife Mary had a stage hit in "A Touch of Brimstone" (1935), and refused to give up her Broadway career to go to Hollywood. After the play closed she relented, but insisted on continuing her career and the couple divorced in 1937.
On August 21, 1938, Bogart entered into a disastrous third marriage, with actress Mayo Methot, a lively, friendly woman when sober but paranoid and physical when drunk. She became convinced Bogart was cheating on her. The more the two drifted apart, the more she drank, in her fury throwing plants, crockery, anything close at hand, at him. She set their house on fire, stabbed him with a knife, and slashed her wrists on several occasions. Bogart for his part needled her mercilessly and seemed to enjoy confrontation. Sometimes he turned violent. The press accurately dubbed them "the Battling Bogarts".

"The Bogart-Methot marriage was the sequel to the Civil War," said their friend Julius Epstein. A wag observed that there was "madness in his Methot." During this time, Bogart bought a motor launch, which he named "Sluggy," his nickname for hot-tempered Methot. Despite his proclamations that, "I like a jealous wife," "We get on so well together (because) we don't have illusions about each other," and, "I wouldn't give you two cents for a dame without a temper," it was a highly destructive relationship.

Bogart had a lifelong disgust for the pretentious, fake or phony. Sensitive yet caustic, he was once again disgusted by the inferior movies he was performing in. He rarely saw his own films and avoided premieres. He even issued phony press releases about his private life to satisfy the curiosity of newspapers and the public. When he thought an actor, director, or a movie studio had done something shoddy, he spoke up about it and was willing to be quoted. He advised Robert Mitchum that the only way to stay alive in Hollywood was to be an "againster." As a result, he was not the most popular of actors, and some in the Hollywood community shunned him privately to avoid trouble with the studios. But the Hollywood press, unaccustomed to candor, was delighted. Bogart once said:
"High Sierra", a 1941 film directed by Raoul Walsh, had a screenplay written by Bogart's friend and drinking partner, John Huston, adapted from the novel by W. R. Burnett ("Little Caesar", etc.). Both Paul Muni and George Raft turned down the lead role, giving Bogart the opportunity to play a character of some depth, although legendary director Walsh initially fought the casting of supporting player Bogart as a leading man, much preferring Raft for the part. The film was Bogart's last major film playing a gangster (only a supporting role in 1942's "The Big Shot" followed). Bogart worked well with Ida Lupino, and her relationship with him was close, provoking jealousy from Bogart's wife, Mayo.

The film cemented a strong personal and professional connection between Bogart and Huston. Bogart admired and somewhat envied Huston for his skill as a writer. Though a poor student, Bogart was a lifelong reader. He could quote Plato, Pope, Ralph Waldo Emerson, and over a thousand lines of Shakespeare. He subscribed to the "Harvard Law Review". He admired writers, and some of his best friends were screenwriters, including Louis Bromfield, Nathaniel Benchley, and Nunnally Johnson. Bogart enjoyed intense, provocative conversation and stiff drinks, as did Huston. Both were rebellious and liked to play childish pranks. Huston was reported to be easily bored during production, and admired Bogart (also bored easily off camera) not just for his acting talent but for his intense concentration on the set.

Now regarded as a classic film noir, "The Maltese Falcon" (1941) was John Huston's directorial debut. Originally a novel written by Dashiell Hammett, it was first published in the pulp magazine "Black Mask" in 1929, and had also served as the basis of two other movie versions including "Satan Met a Lady" (1936) starring Bette Davis. Producer Hal Wallis initially offered the leading man role to George Raft, a more established box office name than Bogart, whose contract stipulated he did not have to appear in remakes. Fearing it would be no more than a cleaned-up version of the pre-Production Code "The Maltese Falcon" (1931), Raft turned it down in order to make "Manpower" with director Raoul Walsh and cast members Edward G. Robinson and Marlene Dietrich. Eagerly, Huston accepted Bogart as his Sam Spade.

Complementing Bogart were co-stars Sydney Greenstreet, Peter Lorre, Elisha Cook, Jr., and Mary Astor as the treacherous female foil. Bogart's sharp timing and facial expressions were praised by the cast and director as vital to the quick action and rapid-fire dialogue. The film was a huge hit in theaters and a major triumph for Huston. Bogart was unusually happy with it, remarking, "it is practically a masterpiece. I don't have many things I'm proud of ... but that's one".

Bogart gained his first real romantic lead in 1942's "Casablanca", playing Rick Blaine, a hard-pressed expatriate nightclub owner hiding from a shady past while negotiating a fine line among Nazis, the French underground, the Vichy prefect and unresolved feelings for his ex-girlfriend. The film was directed by Michael Curtiz and produced by Hal Wallis, and featured Ingrid Bergman, Claude Rains, Sydney Greenstreet, Paul Henreid, Conrad Veidt, Peter Lorre and Dooley Wilson. An avid chess player, Bogart reportedly had the idea that Rick Blaine be portrayed as one, a metaphor for the sparring relationship he maintained with friends, enemies, and tenuous allies. In real life Bogart played tournament level chess one division below master, often enjoying games with crew members and cast, but finding his better in the superior Paul Henreid.

The on-screen magic of Bogart and Bergman was the result of two actors working at their best, not any real-life sparks, though Bogart's perennially jealous wife assumed otherwise. Off the set, the co-stars hardly spoke. Bergman, who had a reputation for affairs with her leading men, later said of Bogart, "I kissed him but I never knew him." Because Bergman was taller, Bogart had blocks attached to his shoes in certain scenes.

"Casablanca" won the 1943 Academy Award for Best Picture. Bogart was nominated for an Academy Award Best Actor in a Leading Role, but lost to Paul Lukas for his performance in "Watch on the Rhine". The film vaulted Bogart from fourth place to first in the studio's roster, finally overtaking James Cagney. By 1946 he'd more than doubled his annual salary to over $460,000, making him the highest-paid actor in the world.

During part of 1943 and 1944, Bogart went on USO and War Bond tours accompanied by Methot, enduring arduous travels to Italy and North Africa, including Casablanca. 

Bogart met Lauren Bacall while filming "To Have and Have Not" (1944), a loose adaptation of the Ernest Hemingway novel. The movie has many similarities with "Casablanca"—the same enemies, the same kind of hero, even a piano player sidekick (played by Hoagy Carmichael). When they met, Bacall was 19 and Bogart 44. He nicknamed her "Baby." She had been a model since 16 and had acted in two failed plays. Bogart was drawn to Bacall's high cheekbones, green eyes, tawny blond hair, and lean body, as well as her maturity, poise and earthy, outspoken honesty. Reportedly he said, "I just saw your test. We'll have a lot of fun together". Their physical and emotional rapport was very strong from the start, their age difference and disparity in acting experience allowing the dynamic of a mentor-student relationship to emerge. Quite contrary to Hollywood norm, their affair was Bogart's first with a leading lady. He was still married and his early meetings with Bacall were discreet and brief, their separations bridged by ardent love letters. The relationship made it much easier for the newcomer to make her first film, and Bogart did his best to put her at ease with jokes and quiet coaching. He let her steal scenes and even encouraged it. Howard Hawks, for his part, also did his best to boost her performance and highlight her role, and found Bogart easy to direct.

Hawks at some point began to disapprove of the pair. He considered himself Bacall's protector and mentor, and Bogart was usurping that role. Married, and not usually drawn to his starlets, he too fell for Bacall, telling her she meant nothing to Bogart and even threatening to send her to Monogram, the worst studio in Hollywood. Bogart calmed her down and then went after Hawks. Jack Warner settled the dispute and filming resumed. Hawks said of Bacall: "Bogie fell in love with the character she played, so she had to keep playing it the rest of her life."

Just months after wrapping the film, Bogart and Bacall were reunited for an encore, the film noir "The Big Sleep", based on the novel by Raymond Chandler, again with script help from William Faulkner. Chandler thoroughly admired Bogart's performance: "Bogart can be tough without a gun. Also, he has a sense of humor that contains that grating undertone of contempt." The film was completed and slated for release in 1945, then withdrawn and substantially re-edited to add new, juiced-up scenes exploiting both the box office chemistry that shone between Bogart and Bacall in "To Have and Have Not", and the notoriety of their personal relationship.

At director Howard Hawks' urging production partner Charles K. Feldman agreed to Bacall's scenes being re-written to heighten the 'insolent' quality that had intrigued critics and audiences in that film. By chance, a 35-mm nitrate composite master positive (fine grain) of the 1945 version survived. The UCLA Film Archive, in association with Turner Entertainment and with funding provided by Hugh Hefner, restored and released it in 1996.

Throughout filming Bogart was still torn between his new love and his sense of duty to his marriage. The mood on the set was tense, the actors both emotionally exhausted as Bogart tried to find a way out of his dilemma. The dialogue, especially in the newly shot scenes, was full of sexual innuendo supplied by Hawks, and Bogart proves convincing and enduring as private detective Philip Marlowe. In the end, the film was successful, though some critics found the plot confusing and overcomplicated. Reportedly a bemused Chandler himself could not answer baffled screenwriters' question over who killed the limousine driver early in the story.

Bogart filed for divorce from Methot in February 1945. He and Bacall married in a small ceremony at the country home of Bogart's close friend, Pulitzer Prize-winning author Louis Bromfield, at Malabar Farm near Lucas, Ohio, on May 21, 1945.

Bogart and Bacall moved into a $160,000 ($ in ) white brick mansion in an exclusive neighborhood in Los Angeles's Holmby Hills. The marriage proved a happy one, though there were tensions due to their differences. Bogart's drinking sometimes inflamed tensions. He was a homebody and she liked nightlife; he loved the sea, which made her seasick.

In California in 1945, Bogart bought a sailing yacht, the "Santana", from actor Dick Powell. He found the sea a sanctuary, spending about thirty weekends a year on the water, with a particular fondness for sailing around Catalina Island. He once said, "An actor needs something to stabilize his personality, something to nail down what he really is, not what he is currently pretending to be." He also joined the Coast Guard Temporary Reserve offering the use of his own yacht, Santana, for Coast Guard use. It was rumored Bogart attempted to enlist but was turned down because of his age.

The suspenseful "Dark Passage" (1947) was Bogart and Bacall's next pairing.
Its first third is shot from the Bogart's character's point of view, with the camera seeing what he sees. After his plastic surgery, the rest of the movie is shot normally, with Bogart intent on finding the real murderer in a crime for which he was blamed and sentenced to prison.

The couple next starred in the future classic, "Key Largo". Directed by John Huston, the film highlighted Edward G. Robinson as gangster "Johnny Rocco," a seething older synthesis of many of his vicious early bad guy roles. The characters are trapped during a spectacular hurricane in a hotel owned by Bacall's screen father-in-law, played by Lionel Barrymore. Claire Trevor won an Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress for her heart-wrenching performance as Rocco's physically abused alcoholic girlfriend. Though Robinson had always had top billing over Bogart in their previous films together, this time Robinson's name appears to the right of Bogart's, but placed a little higher on the posters and in the film's opening credits, to signify Robinson's near-equal status. Robinson's image was also markedly larger and centered on the original poster, with Bogart relegated to the background.

In the film's trailer, Bogart is repeatedly mentioned first, but Robinson's name is listed above Bogart's in a cast list at the trailer's end. Robinson's role is evocative of Duke Mantee in "The Petrified Forest" (1936), a Bogart leading man breakthrough the studio had originally earmarked for Robinson.

Bogart became a first-time father at age 49 when Bacall gave birth to Stephen Humphrey Bogart on January 6, 1949, during the filming of "Tokyo Joe". The name was drawn from Bogart's character's nickname in "To Have and Have Not", "Steve". Stephen would go on to become an author and biographer, later hosting a television special about his father on Turner Classic Movies. Three years later the couple's daughter, Leslie Howard Bogart, was born on August 23, 1952 and she would draw her name from Bogart's friend and "The Petrified Forest" co-star, British actor Leslie Howard.

The enormous success of "Casablanca" redefined Bogart's career. For the first time, Bogart could be cast successfully as both a tough, strong man and vulnerable love interest. Despite his elevated standing, he did not yet have a contractual right of script refusal. When he got weak scripts he simply dug in his heels and locked horns again with the front office, as he did on the film "Conflict" (1945). Though he submitted to Jack Warner on it, he successfully turned down "God is My Co-Pilot" (1945).

Riding high in 1947 with a new contract which provided limited script refusal and the right to form his own production company, Bogart reunited with John Huston for "The Treasure of the Sierra Madre", a stark tale of greed played out by three gold prospectors in Mexico. Without either a love interest or happy ending it was deemed a risky project. Bogart later said of co-star (and John Huston's father) Walter Huston, "He's probably the only performer in Hollywood to whom I'd gladly lose a scene".

The film was shot in the heat of summer for greater realism and atmosphere, proving grueling to make. James Agee wrote, "Bogart does a wonderful job with this character ... miles ahead of the very good work he has done before". John Huston won the Academy Award for direction and screenplay and his father won Best Supporting Actor, but the film had mediocre box office results. Bogart complained, "An intelligent script, beautifully directed—something different—and the public turned a cold shoulder on it".

Bogart, a liberal Democrat, organized a delegation to Washington, D.C., called the Committee for the First Amendment, against what he perceived to be the House Un-American Activities Committee's harassment of Hollywood screenwriters and actors. He subsequently wrote an article "I'm No Communist" in the March 1948 edition of "Photoplay" magazine in which he distanced himself from The Hollywood Ten to counter the negative publicity resulting from his appearance. Bogart wrote: "The ten men cited for contempt by the House Un-American Activities Committee were not defended by us."

In addition to being offered better, more diverse roles, Bogart started his own production company in 1948, Santana Productions, named after his sailing yacht (which also lent her name to the cabin cruiser featured in the climax of that year's smash, "Key Largo"). Earning the right to create his own production company had left Warner Bros. head Jack Warner furious, and afraid other stars would do the same and further erode the major studios' power. In addition to the pressure they were bearing from freelancing actors like Bogart, James Stewart, Henry Fonda and others, they were beginning to buckle from the eroding impact of television and enforcement of anti-trust laws breaking up theater chains. Bogart performed in his final films for Warners, "Chain Lightning", released early in 1950, and "The Enforcer", early in 1951.

Bogart's Santana Productions released its films through Columbia Pictures. Without letting up, Bogart starred in "Knock on Any Door" (1949), "Tokyo Joe" (1949), "In a Lonely Place" (1950), "Sirocco" (1951) and "Beat the Devil" (1953). Santana made two other films without him: "And Baby Makes Three" (1949) and "The Family Secret" (1951).

While the majority lost money at the box office, ultimately forcing Santana's sale, at least two are well remembered today: "In a Lonely Place" is considered by many a high point in film noir. Bogart plays embittered writer Dixon Steele, whose history of violence lands him as top suspect in a murder case. At the same time he falls in love with an alluring but failed actress played by Gloria Grahame. It is considered among his best performances, and many Bogart biographers and actress/writer Louise Brooks feel the role is the closest to the real Bogart of any he played. She wrote that the film "gave him a role that he could play with complexity, because the film character's pride in his art, his selfishness, drunkenness, lack of energy stabbed with lightning strokes of violence were shared by the real Bogart". The character even mimics some of Bogart's personal habits, including twice ordering Bogart's favorite meal of ham and eggs.

Something of a parody of "The Maltese Falcon", "Beat the Devil" was Bogart's last film with his close friend and favorite director John Huston. Co-written by Truman Capote, the eccentrically filmed tale follows an amoral group of rogues chasing an unattainable treasure.

Bogart sold his interest in Santana to Columbia for over $1 million in 1955.

Working outside of his own Santana Productions, Bogart starred with Katharine Hepburn in the John Huston directed "The African Queen" in 1951. The C.S. Forester novel on which it was based was overlooked and left undeveloped for fifteen years until producer Sam Spiegel and Huston bought the rights. Spiegel sent Katharine Hepburn the book and she suggested Bogart for the male lead, firmly believing that "he was the only man who could have played that part". Huston's love of adventure, deep, longstanding friendship–and success–with Bogart, and a chance to work with Hepburn, convinced the actor to leave the comfortable confines of Hollywood for a difficult shoot on location in the Belgian Congo in Africa. Bogart was to get 30 percent of the profits and Hepburn 10 percent, plus a relatively small salary for both. The stars met up in London and announced the happy prospect of working together.

Bacall came for the four-month-plus duration, leaving their young child to be cared for in L.A. The Bogarts started the trip with a junket through Europe, including a visit with Pope Pius XII. Later, the glamor would be gone and Bacall would make herself useful as a cook, nurse and clothes washer, earning her husband's praise: "I don't know what we'd have done without her. She Luxed my undies in darkest Africa". Just about everyone in the cast came down with dysentery except Bogart and Huston, who subsisted on canned food and alcohol. Bogart explained: "All I ate was baked beans, canned asparagus and Scotch whisky. Whenever a fly bit Huston or me, it dropped dead." Hepburn, a teetotaler in and out of character, fared worse in the difficult conditions, losing weight and at one point falling very ill. Bogart resisted Huston's insistence on using real leeches in a key scene where Charlie has to drag his steam launch through an infested marsh, until reasonable fakes were employed. In the end, the crew overcame illness, soldier ant invasions, leaking boats, poor food, attacking hippos, poor water filters, fierce heat, isolation, and a boat fire to complete a memorable film. Despite the discomfort of jumping from the boat into swamps, rivers and marshes the film apparently rekindled Bogart's early love of boats. On his return to California he bought a classic mahogany Hacker-Craft runabout, which he kept until his death.

The role of cantankerous skipper Charlie Allnutt won Bogart his only Academy Award in three nominations, for Best Actor in a Leading Role in 1951. Bogart considered his performance to be the best of his film career. He had vowed to friends that if he won, his speech would break the convention of thanking everyone in sight. He advised Claire Trevor, when she had been nominated for "Key Largo", to "just say you did it all yourself and don't thank anyone". But when Bogart won the Academy Award, which he truly coveted despite his well-advertised disdain for Hollywood, he said "It's a long way from the Belgian Congo to the stage of this theatre. It's nicer to be here. Thank you very much ... No one does it alone. As in tennis, you need a good opponent or partner to bring out the best in you. John and Katie helped me to be where I am now". Despite the thrilling win and the recognition, Bogart later commented, "The way to survive an Oscar is never to try to win another one ... too many stars ... win it and then figure they have to top themselves ... they become afraid to take chances. The result: A lot of dull performances in dull pictures".

"The African Queen" was the first Technicolor film in which Bogart appeared. He appeared in relatively few color films of any kind during the rest of his career, which continued for another five years.

Just three years after his Best Actor triumph in "African Queen", Bogart dropped his asking price to get the role of Captain Queeg in Edward Dmytryk's 1954 drama "The Caine Mutiny". Though he griped with some of his old bitterness about having to do so, he delivered a strong performance in the lead, earning him his final Oscar nomination as well as being the subject of the cover story in the June 7, 1954 issue of "TIME". Yet for all his success, Bogart was still his melancholy old self, grumbling and feuding with the studio, while his health was beginning to deteriorate. The character of Queeg mirrored in some ways those Bogart had played in "The Maltese Falcon", "Casablanca" and "The Big Sleep"–the wary loner who trusts no one—but without either the warmth or humor of those roles. Like his portrayal of Fred C. Dobbs in "The Treasure of the Sierra Madre", Bogart played a paranoid, self-pitying character whose small-mindedness eventually destroyed him. Three months before the film's release, Bogart appeared as Queeg on the cover of "TIME" magazine, while on Broadway Henry Fonda was starring in the stage version (in a different role), both of which generated strong publicity for the film.
In "Sabrina", Billy Wilder wished to cast Cary Grant as the older male lead. Unable, he chose Bogart to play the elder, conservative brother who competes with his younger playboy sibling (William Holden) for the affection of the Cinderella-like Sabrina (Audrey Hepburn). Bogart was lukewarm about the part, but agreed to it on a handshake with Wilder, sans finished script but with the director's assurances he would take good care of Bogart during the filming. Nevertheless, Bogart got on poorly with his director and co-stars. He complained about the script and its last-minute drafting and delivery, and accused Wilder of favoring Hepburn and Holden on and off the set. At the root was Wilder being the opposite of Bogart's ideal director, John Huston, in both style and personality. Bogart groused to the press that Wilder was "overbearing" and "is the kind of Prussian German with a riding crop. He is the type of director I don't like to work with ... the picture is a crock of crap. I got sick and tired of who gets Sabrina." Wilder later claimed, "We parted as enemies but finally made up." Despite the acrimony, the film was successful. "The New York Times" crowed that Bogart was "incredibly adroit ... the skill with which this old rock-ribbed actor blends the gags and such duplicities with a manly manner of melting is one of the incalculable joys of the show."

"The Barefoot Contessa", directed by Joseph Mankiewicz, was filmed in Rome, and released in 1954. In this Hollywood back-story Bogart is again a broken-down man, the cynical director-narrator who saves his career by making a star of a flamenco dancer modeled on real life movie sex goddess Rita Hayworth. Bogart was uneasy with Ava Gardner in the female lead, as she had just split from close "Rat Pack" buddy Frank Sinatra and was carrying on an affair with bullfighter Luis Miguel Dominguín. Bogart told her, "Half the world's female population would throw themselves at Frank's feet and here you are flouncing around with guys who wear capes and little ballerina slippers." He was also annoyed by her inexperienced performance. Later, Gardner credited Bogart with helping her both on and offscreen. Bogart's performance was generally praised as the strongest part of the film. During the filming, while Bacall was home, Bogart resumed his discreet affair with Verita Bouvaire-Thompson, his long-time studio assistant, whom he took sailing and enjoyed drinking with. When his wife suddenly arrived on the scene discovering them together, she took it quite well, extracting an expensive shopping spree from her husband, the three traveling together after the shooting.

Bogart could be generous with actors, particularly those who were blacklisted, down on their luck, or having personal problems. During the filming of the Edward Dmytryk directed "The Left Hand of God" (1955), he noticed his co-star Gene Tierney having a hard time remembering her lines and behaving oddly. He coached Tierney, feeding her lines. He was familiar with mental illness from his sister's bouts of depression, and encouraged Tierney to seek treatment. He also stood behind Joan Bennett and insisted on her as his co-star in Michael Curtiz's "We're No Angels" when an ugly public scandal made her persona non grata with Jack Warner.

Bogart rounded out 1955 with "The Desperate Hours", directed by William Wyler. Mark Robson's "The Harder They Fall" (1956) was his last film.

While Bogart rarely performed on television, he and Bacall appeared on Edward R. Murrow's "Person to Person" in which they disagreed in answering every question. Bogart was also featured on "The Jack Benny Show". The surviving kinescope of the live telecast captures him in his only TV sketch comedy outing.

Bogart and Bacall also worked together on an early color telecast in 1955, an NBC adaptation of "The Petrified Forest" for "Producers' Showcase", with Bogart receiving top billing and Henry Fonda playing Leslie Howard's role; a black and white kinescope of the live telecast has also survived.

Bogart performed radio adaptations of some of his best known films, such as "Casablanca" and "The Maltese Falcon". He also recorded a radio series called "Bold Venture" with Lauren Bacall.

In 1995 newly developed digital technology allowed Bogart's image to be inserted in the "Tales from the Crypt" television episode "You, Murderer" as one of its many "Casablanca" references. The "Ingrid Bergman" character was played by her daughter Isabella Rossellini.

Bogart was a founding member and the original leader of the so-called Hollywood Rat Pack. In the spring of 1955, after a long party in Las Vegas attended by Frank Sinatra, Judy Garland, her husband Sid Luft, Mike Romanoff and wife Gloria, David Niven, Angie Dickinson and others, Lauren Bacall surveyed the wreckage and declared, "You look like a goddamn rat pack."

The name stuck and was made official at Romanoff's in Beverly Hills. Sinatra was tabbed Pack Leader, Bacall, Den Mother; Bogie, Director of Public Relations; and Sid Luft, Acting Cage Manager. When asked by columnist Earl Wilson what the group's purpose was, Bacall stated: "To drink a lot of bourbon and stay up late."

Once, after signing a long-term deal with Warner Bros., Bogart had predicted with glee that his teeth and hair would fall out before the contract ended. By 1955, though he was well established as an independent producer, the sometime actor's health was failing. In the wake of Santana Productions he had formed a new company and had anxious plans for a film, "Melville Goodwin, U.S.A.", in which he would play a General and Bacall a press magnate. However, his persistent cough and difficulty eating became too serious to ignore and he dropped the project.

Bogart, a heavy smoker and drinker, had developed cancer of the esophagus. He almost never spoke of his failing health and refused to see a doctor until January 1956 after much persistence from Bacall. A diagnosis of cancer was made several weeks later. He underwent a surgical operation on March 1, 1956, where his entire esophagus, two lymph nodes, and a rib were removed but, by then, it was too late to halt the disease, even with chemotherapy. He underwent corrective surgery in November 1956 after the cancer had spread. With time, he grew too weak to walk up and down stairs, fighting the pain yet still able to joke: "Put me in the dumbwaiter and I'll ride down to the first floor in style." It was then altered to accommodate his wheelchair. Frank Sinatra was a frequent visitor, as were Katharine Hepburn and Spencer Tracy. In an interview, Hepburn described the last time she and Tracy saw their dear friend, on the evening of January 13, 1957, the day before Bogart's death:

Bogart fell into a coma and died in his bed the next day. He had just turned 57 twenty days prior and weighed only . His simple funeral was held at All Saints Episcopal Church, with musical selections from favorite composers Johann Sebastian Bach and Claude Debussy. The ceremony was attended by some of Hollywood's biggest stars, including Hepburn, Tracy, Judy Garland, David Niven, Ronald Reagan, James Mason, Bette Davis, Danny Kaye, Joan Fontaine, Marlene Dietrich, James Cagney, Errol Flynn, Gregory Peck, Gary Cooper, Billy Wilder, and Jack Warner. Bacall had asked Tracy to give the eulogy, but he was too upset, so John Huston spoke instead. He reminded the gathered mourners that while Bogart's life had ended far too soon, it had been a rich one:

Bogart's cremated remains were interred in Forest Lawn Memorial Park Cemetery, Glendale, California, in the Garden of Memory, Columbarium of Eternal Light. He was buried with a small, gold whistle once part of a charm bracelet he had given to Lauren Bacall before they married. On it was inscribed an allusion to a line from their first movie together, in 1944, "To Have and Have Not", where Bacall had said to him shortly after their first meeting: "You know how to whistle, don't you, Steve? You just put your lips together and blow". The inscription read: "If you want anything, just whistle."

The probate value of Bogart's estate was $910,146 gross and $737,668 net ($ million and $ million in , respectively).

After his death, a "Bogie Cult" formed at the Brattle Theatre in Cambridge, Massachusetts, as well as Greenwich Village, Manhattan, New York, and in France, which contributed to his spike in popularity in the late 1950s and 1960s. In 1997, "Entertainment Weekly" magazine named Bogart the number one movie legend of all time. In 1999, the American Film Institute ranked him the Greatest Male Star of Classic Hollywood.

Jean-Luc Godard's "Breathless" (1960) was the first film to pay tribute to Bogart. Later, in Woody Allen's comic paean to Bogart, "Play It Again, Sam" (1972), Bogart's ghost comes to the aid of Allen's bumbling character, a movie critic with women troubles whose "sex life has turned into the 'Petrified Forest'".

On August 21, 1946, Bogart was honored in a ceremony at Grauman's Chinese Theater to record his hand and footprints in cement. On February 8, 1960, he was posthumously inducted into the Hollywood Walk of Fame with a motion pictures star located at 6322 Hollywood Boulevard. During his career, Bogart was nominated for several awards including the BAFTA award for Best Foreign Actor in 1952 for "The African Queen" and three Academy Awards.

In 1997, the United States Postal Service honored Bogart with a stamp bearing his image in its "Legends of Hollywood" series as the third figure to be recognized. At a formal ceremony attended by Lauren Bacall, and the Bogart children, Stephen and Leslie, Tirso del Junco, the chairman of the governing board of the USPS, provided an eloquent tribute:

"Today, we mark another chapter in the Bogart legacy. With an image that is small and yet as powerful as the ones he left in celluloid, we will begin today to bring his artistry, his power, his unique star quality, to the messages that travel the world."

On June 24, 2006, a section of 103rd Street, between Broadway and West End Avenue, in New York City was renamed "Humphrey Bogart Place." Lauren Bacall and her son Stephen Bogart were present at the commemorative event. "Bogie would never have believed it," Lauren Bacall expressed to the assembled group of city officials and onlookers in attendance.

Humphrey Bogart's life has inspired writers and others:

Bogart is credited with five of the American Film Institute's top 100 quotations in American cinema, the most by any actor:

Bogart is also credited with one of the top movie misquotations, "Play it again, Sam". In "Casablanca", neither his Rick Blaine character nor anyone else says the line, although it is widely credited to him and is the verbatim title of a Woody Allen tribute movie.

When Blaine's former love, Ilsa (Ingrid Bergman), first enters his "Café Americain", she spots Sam, the piano player (Dooley Wilson), and asks him to "Play it once, Sam, for old times' sake." When he feigns ignorance, she persists, "Play it, Sam. Play 'As Time Goes By.'" Later that night, alone with Sam, Rick demands, "You played it for her — you can play it for me." Sam once again resists, prompting Blaine to shout: "If she can stand it, I can! Play it!"




</doc>
<doc id="168494" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=168494" title="F. Murray Abraham">
F. Murray Abraham

F. Murray Abraham (born Murray Abraham; October 24, 1939) is an American actor. He became widely known during the 1980s after winning the Academy Award for Best Actor for his role as Antonio Salieri in "Amadeus" (1984). He has appeared in many roles, both leading and supporting, in films such as "All the President's Men" (1976), "Scarface" (1983), "The Name of the Rose" (1986), "Last Action Hero" (1993), "" (1998), "Finding Forrester" (2000), "Inside Llewyn Davis" (2013) and "The Grand Budapest Hotel" (2014). He is also known for his television and theatre work and is now a regular cast member on the award-winning television series "Homeland".

Abraham was born Murray Abraham on October 24, 1939 in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, the son of Fahrid "Fred" Abraham, an auto mechanic, and his wife Josephine ("née" Stello), a housewife. His father was Assyrian and emigrated from Syria at age 5 during the 1920s famine; his paternal grandfather was a chanter in the Syriac Orthodox Church. His mother, one of 14 children, was Italian American, and the daughter of an immigrant who worked in the coal mines of Western Pennsylvania. He had two brothers, Robert and Jack, who were killed in separate car accidents.

Abraham was raised in El Paso, Texas, near the Mexican border. He attended Vilas Grammar School, and graduated from El Paso High School in 1958. He was a gang member during his teenage years. He attended Texas Western College (later named University of Texas at El Paso), where he was given the best actor award by Alpha Psi Omega for his portrayal of the Indian Nocona in "Comanche Eagle" during the 1959–60 season. He attended the University of Texas at Austin, then studied acting under Uta Hagen in New York City. He began his acting career on the stage, debuting in a Los Angeles production of Ray Bradbury's "The Wonderful Ice Cream Suit".

Abraham added "F." to his stage name in honor of his father, Fahrid. He has stated "Murray Abraham just doesn't seem to say anything. It just is another name, so I thought I'd frame it."

Abraham made his screen debut as an usher in the George C. Scott comedy "They Might Be Giants" (1971). By the mid-1970s, Murray had steady employment as an actor, doing commercials and voice-overs. Abraham can be seen as one of the undercover police officers along with Al Pacino in Sidney Lumet's "Serpico" (1973), and in television roles including the bad guy in one third-season episode of "Kojak". He played a cabdriver in the theatrical version of "The Prisoner of Second Avenue" (1975), a mechanic in the theatrical version of "The Sunshine Boys" (1975), and a police officer in the film "All the President's Men" (1976).

Despite these small roles, Abraham continued to do commercials and voice-over work for income. But in 1978, he decided to give them up. Frustrated with the lack of substantial roles, Abraham said, "No one was taking my acting seriously. I figured if I didn't do it, then I'd have no right to the dreams I've always had." His wife, Kate Hannan, went to work as an assistant and Abraham became a "house husband". He described, "I cooked and cleaned and took care of the kids. It was very rough on my macho idea of life. But it was the best thing that ever happened to me." Abraham appeared as drug dealer Omar Suárez alongside Pacino again in the gangster film "Scarface" (1983). He gained visibility voicing a talking bunch of grapes in a series of television commercials for Fruit of the Loom underwear.

Abraham won the Academy Award for Best Actor for his role as envious composer Antonio Salieri in "Amadeus" (1985), an award for which Tom Hulce, playing Mozart in that movie, had also been nominated. He won a Golden Globe Award, among other awards, and his role in the film, directed by Miloš Forman, is still his most iconic. (He later continued the classical-music theme by narrating the plot summaries of the operas of Wagner's "Ring Cycle" in the 1990 PBS broadcast from the Metropolitan Opera, to the largest viewing audience of the "Ring Cycle" in history, conducted by James Levine.)

After "Amadeus", he next appeared in "The Name of the Rose" (1986), in which he played Bernardo Gui, nemesis to Sean Connery's William of Baskerville. In its DVD commentary, his director on the film, Jean-Jacques Annaud, described Abraham as an "egomaniac" on the set, who considered himself more important than Sean Connery, since Connery did not have an Oscar. That said, the film was a critical success. Abraham had tired of appearing as heavies and wanted to return to his background in comedy, as he explained to "People Weekly" Magazine in an interview he gave at the time of its release.

Though Abraham had fewer prominent roles in the next decade or so, he became known for his roles in Woody Allen's "Mighty Aphrodite" (1995), Ahdar Ru'afo in "" (1998), and Gus Van Sant's "Finding Forrester" (2000), where he once again played nemesis to Connery. He had a significant role in "The Bonfire of the Vanities" (1990), but chose not to be credited due to a contract dispute.

Abraham's relatively low-profile film career subsequent to his Academy Award win has been widely considered an example of the "Oscar jinx". According to film critic Leonard Maltin, professional failure following an early success is referred to in Hollywood circles as the "F. Murray Abraham syndrome". Abraham rejected this notion and told Maltin, "The Oscar is the single most important event of my career. I have dined with kings, shared equal billing with my idols, lectured at Harvard and Columbia. If this is a jinx, I'll take two." In the same interview, Abraham said, "Even though I won the Oscar, I can still take the subway in New York, and nobody recognizes me. Some actors might find that disconcerting, but I find it refreshing."

A 2009 guest appearance on "Saving Grace" began a new phase of Abraham's career, wherein he has become gradually more prolific onscreen. Further guest appearances include roles on "" and "Louie", among others, as well as a recurring role on "The Good Wife" between 2011 and 2014. Additionally, Abraham was the primary narrator for the PBS series "Nature" between 2007 and 2010, narrating 32 episodes (plus one more in 2013). Abraham's most notable television role came about through Showtime's drama series "Homeland", in which he portrayed black ops specialist Dar Adal. This role resulted in his first Emmy Award nomination in 2015.

He has featured prominently in two widely acclaimed 2010s films: first as folk music impresario Bud Grossman in the Coen brothers' drama "Inside Llewyn Davis" (2013), then as the mysterious Mr. Moustafa in Wes Anderson's "The Grand Budapest Hotel" (2014).

Since "Amadeus", he has mainly focused on classical theatre, and has starred in many Shakespearean productions such as "Othello" and "Richard III". He was highlighted in many other plays by the likes of Samuel Beckett and Gilbert and Sullivan, and played the lead in Anton Chekhov's "Uncle Vanya" (for which he received an Obie Award).

Abraham has focused on stage work throughout his career, giving notable performances as Pozzo in Mike Nichols's production of "Waiting for Godot", Malvolio in "Twelfth Night" for the New York Shakespeare Festival, and Shylock in "The Merchant of Venice" for the Off-Broadway Theatre for a New Audience (TFANA) in March 2007, which was performed at the Duke Theatre in New York and also at the Swan Theatre, part of the Royal Shakespeare Company. He reprised this role in February 2011, when he replaced Al Pacino in the Public Theater's production. In the 1997/98 Broadway season, he starred in the new chamber musical "Triumph of Love" opposite Betty Buckley, based on Marivaux's classic comedy. The production did not find a large audience, running 85 performances, after its pre-opening preview period. He has also taught theater at Brooklyn College. In 2016, he played the title role in Classic Stage Company's production of "Nathan the Wise".

F. Murray Abraham also joined The Mirror Theater Ltd's Mirror Repertory Company in 1984. He joined MRC the week after winning his Oscar for Best Actor for his work in "Amadeus" because he wanted to work with MRC Artist-in-Resience Geraldine Page, and would star opposite her in MRC’s "The Madwoman of Chaillot".

In 1994, Abraham portrayed Roy Cohn in the first Broadway production of Tony Kushner's at the Walter Kerr Theater, replacing Ron Leibman in the role.

Abraham has been married to Kate Hannan since 1962; they have two children, Mick and Jamili, and one grandchild, Hannan.

In January 2010, Abraham was the on-the-scene hero of a real-life crime scene at the Classic Stage Company in New York City, when he scuffled with a thief in the dressing room area during a public rehearsal.

Abraham has spoken about his faith: "I've attended many churches. I grew up as an Orthodox Christian and I was an altar boy. I love the Society of Friends, the Quakers. I attended their meetings for almost 15 years. I'm now [in 2008] attending the First Presbyterian Church of New York because they're such a generous, terrific church with outreach. They reach out to old people, to homeless, to A.A., to cross-dressers; it's truly a church of the teachings of Christ. Religion is essential to my life."








In July 2004, during a ceremony in Rome, he was awarded the ""Premio per gli Italiani nel Mondo"". This is a prize distributed by the Marzio Tremaglia foundation and the Italian government to Italian emigrants and their descendants who have distinguished themselves abroad.

In 2009, he was recognized by the Alumni Association of the City College of New York with John H. Finley Award in recognition of exemplary dedicated service to the City of New York.

In 2010, Abraham was the recipient of The Gielgud Award (Theatre) for that year.

In 2015, Abraham was an inductee to the American Theater Hall of Fame.

He also has an honorary doctorate from Rider University in Lawrenceville, New Jersey.



</doc>
<doc id="26274410" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26274410" title="Jeremy Irons">
Jeremy Irons

Jeremy John Irons (born 19 September 1948) is an English actor. After receiving classical training at the Bristol Old Vic Theatre School, Irons began his acting career on stage in 1969 and has since appeared in many West End theatre productions, including "The Winter's Tale", "Macbeth", "Much Ado About Nothing", "The Taming of the Shrew", "Godspell", "Richard II", and "Embers". In 1984, he made his Broadway debut in Tom Stoppard's "The Real Thing" and received a Tony Award for Best Actor.

Irons's first major film role came in the 1981 romantic drama "The French Lieutenant's Woman", for which he received a BAFTA nomination for Best Actor. After starring in dramas such as "Moonlighting" (1982), "Betrayal" (1983), and "The Mission" (1986), he gained critical acclaim for portraying twin gynaecologists in David Cronenberg's psychological thriller "Dead Ringers" (1988). In 1990, Irons played accused murderer Claus von Bülow in "Reversal of Fortune", and took home multiple awards, including an Academy Award for Best Actor.

Other notable films have included Steven Soderbergh's mystery thriller "Kafka" (1991), the period drama "The House of the Spirits" (1993), the romantic drama "M. Butterfly" (1993), the voice of Scar in Disney's "The Lion King" (1994), Simon Gruber in the action film "Die Hard with a Vengeance" (1995), the drama "Lolita" (1997), Musketeer Aramis in "The Man in the Iron Mask" (1998), the action adventure "Dungeons & Dragons" (2000), the drama "The Merchant of Venice" (2004), the drama "Being Julia" (2004), the epic historical drama "Kingdom of Heaven" (2005), the fantasy-adventure "Eragon" (2006), the Western "Appaloosa" (2008), and the indie drama "Margin Call" (2011). In 2016, he appeared in "Assassin's Creed" and, starting that year, has played Alfred Pennyworth in the DC Extended Universe, beginning with "" and reprising the role in "Justice League" (2017).

Irons has also made several notable appearances on TV. He earned his first Golden Globe Award nomination for his break-out role in the ITV series "Brideshead Revisited" (1981). In 2005, Irons appeared in the historical miniseries "Elizabeth I", for which he received a Golden Globe Award and an Emmy Award for Best Supporting Actor. From 2011 to 2013, he starred as Pope Alexander VI in the Showtime historical series "The Borgias". He is one of the few actors who have won the "Triple Crown of Acting", winning an Academy Award for film, an Emmy Award television and a Tony Award for theatre. In October 2011, he was nominated the Goodwill Ambassador for the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.

Irons was born in Cowes on the Isle of Wight, the son of Paul Dugan Irons (1913–1983), an accountant, and Barbara Anne Brereton Brymer ("née" Sharpe; 1914–1999). His paternal great-great-grandfather was a Metropolitan Policeman who was sacked for drunkenness, and later a Chartist. He has a small amount of Irish ancestry, tracing back to County Cork. Irons has a brother, Christopher (born 1943), and a sister, Felicity Anne (born 1944). He was educated at the independent Sherborne School in Dorset from 1962 to 1966. He was the drummer and harmonica player in a four-man school band called the Four Pillars of Wisdom.

Irons trained as an actor at the Bristol Old Vic Theatre School and later became president of its fundraising appeal. He performed a number of plays, and busked on the streets of Bristol, before appearing on the London stage as John the Baptist and Judas opposite David Essex in "Godspell", which opened at the Roundhouse on 17 November 1971 before transferring to Wyndham's Theatre playing a total of 1,128 performances.

Irons' TV career began on British television in the early 1970s, including appearances on the children's series "Play Away" and as Franz Liszt in the 1974 BBC series "Notorious Woman". More significantly, he starred in the 13-part adaptation of H.E. Bates' novel "Love for Lydia" for London Weekend Television (1977), and attracted attention for his key role as the pipe-smoking German student, a romantic pairing with Judi Dench, in Harold Pinter's screenplay adaptation of Aidan Higgins' novel "Langrishe, Go Down" for BBC Television (1978).

The role which brought him fame was that of Charles Ryder in the television adaptation of Evelyn Waugh's "Brideshead Revisited" (1981). First broadcast on ITV, the show ranks among the greatest British television dramas, with Irons receiving a Golden Globe nomination for his performance. "Brideshead" reunited him with Anthony Andrews, with whom he had appeared in "The Pallisers" seven years earlier. In the same year he starred in the film "The French Lieutenant's Woman" opposite Meryl Streep.

After these major successes, in 1982 he played the leading role of an exiled Polish building contractor, working in the Twickenham area of southwest London, in Jerzy Skolimowski's independent film "Moonlighting". The film was widely seen on television and Irons' performance extended his acting range. On 23 March 1991, he hosted "Saturday Night Live" on NBC in the US, and appeared as Sherlock Holmes in the Sherlock Holmes' Surprise Party sketch.

In 2005, Irons won both an Emmy award and a Golden Globe award for his supporting role in the TV mini-series, "Elizabeth I". A year later, he was one of the participants in the third series of the BBC documentary series "Who Do You Think You Are?". In 2008, he played Lord Vetinari in "Terry Pratchett's The Colour of Magic", an adaptation for Sky One.

On 6 November 2008, "TV Guide" reported Irons would star as photographer Alfred Stieglitz with Joan Allen as painter Georgia O'Keeffe, in a Lifetime Television biopic, "Georgia O'Keeffe" (2009). Irons also appeared in the documentary for Irish television channel TG4, "Faoi Lan Cheoil", in which he learned to play the fiddle.

On 12 January 2011, Irons was a guest-star in an episode of "" called "Mask". He played Dr. Cap Jackson, a sex therapist. He reprised the role on an episode titled "Totem" that ran on 30 March 2011.

Irons stars in the 2011 US premium cable network Showtime's series "The Borgias", a highly fictionalised account of the Renaissance dynasty of that name.

Irons made his film debut in "Nijinsky" in 1980. He appeared sporadically in films during the 1980s, including the Cannes Palme d'Or winner "The Mission" in 1986, and in the dual role of twin gynaecologists in David Cronenberg's "Dead Ringers" in 1988. Other films include "Danny the Champion of the World" (1989), "Reversal of Fortune" (1990), for which he won the Academy Award for Best Actor, "Kafka" (1991), "Damage" (1993), "M. Butterfly" (1993), "The House of the Spirits" (1993) appearing again with Glenn Close and Meryl Streep, the voice of Scar in "The Lion King" (1994), portraying Simon Gruber in "Die Hard with a Vengeance" (1995), co-starring Bruce Willis and Samuel L. Jackson, Bernardo Bertolucci's "Stealing Beauty" (1996), the 1997 remake of "Lolita", and as the musketeer Aramis opposite Leonardo DiCaprio in the 1998 film version of "The Man in the Iron Mask".
Other roles include the evil wizard Profion in the film "Dungeons and Dragons" (2000) and Rupert Gould in "Longitude" (2000). He played the Über-Morlock in the film "The Time Machine" (2002). In 2004, Irons played Severus Snape in Comic Relief's "Harry Potter" parody, "Harry Potter and the Secret Chamberpot of Azerbaijan". In 2005, he appeared in the films "Casanova" opposite Heath Ledger, and Ridley Scott's "Kingdom of Heaven". He has co-starred with John Malkovich in two films, "The Man in the Iron Mask" (1998) and "Eragon" (2006), though they did not have any scenes together in the latter.

In 2008, Irons co-starred with Ed Harris and Viggo Mortensen in "Appaloosa", directed by Harris. In 2011, Irons appeared alongside Kevin Spacey in the thriller "Margin Call". In 2012, he starred and worked as executive producer of the environmental documentary film "Trashed". Irons played Alfred Pennyworth in Warner Bros.' "" (2016) and "Justice League" (2017). He is expected to reprise the role in the upcoming film "The Batman" (TBA).

He was cast as General Vladimir Korchnoi in Francis Lawrence's spy thriller film "Red Sparrow" (2018), based on Jason Matthews' book of the same name.

Irons has worked with the Royal Shakespeare Company three times in 1976, 1986–87 and 2010. After years of success in the West End in London, Irons made his New York debut in 1984 and won a Tony Award for his Broadway performance opposite Glenn Close in "The Real Thing".

After an absence from the London stage for 18 years, in 2006 he co-starred with Patrick Malahide in Christopher Hampton's stage adaptation of Sándor Márai's novel "Embers" at the Duke of York's Theatre.

He made his National Theatre debut playing former British Prime Minister Harold Macmillan (1957–1963) in "Never So Good", a new play by Howard Brenton which opened at the Lyttelton on 19 March 2008. In 2009, Irons appeared on Broadway opposite Joan Allen in the play "Impressionism". The play ran through 10 May 2009 at the Gerald Schoenfeld Theater.

Irons has had extensive voice work in a range of different fields throughout his career. He read the audiobook recording of Evelyn Waugh's "Brideshead Revisited", Paulo Coelho's ""The Alchemist"", Vladimir Nabokov's "Lolita" (he had also appeared in the 1997 film version of the novel), and "James and the Giant Peach" by the children's author Roald Dahl.

In particular, he has received acclaim for his recordings of the poetry of T.S. Eliot for BBC Radio 4. Beginning in 2012 with "The Waste Land", he went on to record "Four Quartets" in 2014, "The Love Song of J Alfred Prufrock" on the centenary of its publication in 2015, and "Old Possum's Book of Practical Cats" in 2016. He finally completed recording the entire canon of T.S. Eliot which was broadcast over New Year's Day 2017.

One of his best known film roles has turned out to be lending his distinctive voice to Scar in "The Lion King" (1994) serving as the main antagonist of the film. Irons has since provided voiceovers for three Disney World attractions. He narrated the "Spaceship Earth" ride, housed in the large geodesic globe at Epcot in Florida from October 1994 to July 2007. He was also the English narrator for the at the Walt Disney Studios Park at Disneyland Paris. He voiced H. G. Wells in the English language version of the former Disney attraction The Timekeeper. He also reprised his role as Scar in "Fantasmic". He is also one of the readers in the 4x CD boxed set of "The Fairy Tales of Oscar Wilde", produced by Marc Sinden and sold in aid of the Royal Theatrical Fund.

He serves as the English language version of the audio guide for Westminster Abbey in London. Irons has served as voice-over in two big cat documentary films by National Geographic: "Eye of the Leopard", which was released in 2006, and "The Last Lions", which was released on 18 February 2011. He also currently narrates the French-produced documentary series about volcanoes, "Life on Fire". The series premiered on PBS in the United States on 2 January 2013.

In 2008, two researchers, a linguist and a sound engineer, found "the perfect [male] voice" to be a combination of Irons' and Alan Rickman's voices based on a sample of 50 voices. Coincidentally, the two actors played brothers in the "Die Hard" series of films. Speaking at 200 words per minute and pausing for 1.2 seconds between sentences, Irons came very close to the ideal voice model, with the linguist Andrew Linn explaining why his "deep gravelly tones" inspired trust in listeners. He recited the spoken sections, most notably 'Late Lament', for The Moody Blues 50th Anniversary Tour of 'Days Of Future Passed', and also appears on the video presentation.

In 1985, Irons directed a music video for Carly Simon and her heavily promoted single, "Tired of Being Blonde", and in 1994, he had a cameo role in the video for Elastica's hit single "Connection".

Irons has contributed to other musical performances, recording William Walton's "Façade" with Dame Peggy Ashcroft, Stravinsky's The Soldier's Tale conducted by the composer, and in 1987 the songs from Lerner and Loewe's "My Fair Lady" with Dame Kiri Te Kanawa, released on the Decca label. Irons sang segments of "Be Prepared" in the film "The Lion King".

To mark the 100th anniversary of Noël Coward's birth, Irons sang a selection of his songs at the 1999 Last Night of the Proms held at the Royal Albert Hall in London, ending with "London Pride", a patriotic song written in the spring of 1941 during the Blitz. In 2003, Irons played Fredrik Egerman in a New York revival of Stephen Sondheim's "A Little Night Music", and two years later appeared as King Arthur in Lerner and Loewe's "Camelot" at the Hollywood Bowl. He performed the Bob Dylan song "Make You Feel My Love" on the 2006 charity album "Unexpected Dreams – Songs From the Stars".

In 2009, Irons appeared on the Touchstone album "Wintercoast", recording a narrative introduction to the album. Recording took place in New York City, New York in February 2009 during rehearsals for his Broadway play "Impressionism".

At the 1991 Tony Awards, Irons was one of the few celebrities to wear the recently created red ribbon to support the fight against AIDS, and he was the first celebrity to wear it onscreen.

In 1998, Irons and his wife were named in the list of the biggest private financial donors to the Labour Party, a year after its return to government with Tony Blair's victory in the 1997 United Kingdom general election, after 18 years in opposition. He was also one of several celebrities who endorsed the parliamentary candidacy of the Green Party's Caroline Lucas at the 2015 UK general election.

In 2004, he publicly declared his support for the Countryside Alliance, referring to the 2004 Hunting Act as an "outrageous assault on civil liberties" and "one of the two most devastating parliamentary votes in the last century".

Irons is an outspoken critic of the death penalty and has supported the campaign by the human rights organisation Amnesty International UK to abolish capital punishment worldwide. Among his arguments in 2007, Irons states the death penalty infringes on two fundamental human rights, the right to life, and no-one shall be subject to torture, adding that while the person accused of a crime may have abused those rights, to advocate the same be done to them is to join them.

He supports the legal availability of abortion, having said that he believes that "women should be allowed to make the decision". Nevertheless, he agreed with a pro-life advocate and was quoted as saying that "the church is right to say it's a sin".

In 2013, he caused controversy for an interview with the "HuffPost", in which he said he “doesn’t have a strong feeling either way” on gay marriage but expressed fears that it could "debase" marital law, suggesting it could be manipulated to allow fathers to pass on their estates to their sons without being taxed, because he supposed incest laws would not apply to men. He later clarified his comments, saying he was providing an example of a situation that could cause a "legal quagmire" under the laws that allow same-sex marriage, and that he had been misinterpreted. He added that some gay relationships are "healthier" than their straight counterparts. He said in a BBC interview that he wished he’d “buttoned” his lip before asking if its legalization would see fathers marry sons.

He has been criticised in the "British Medical Journal" for his fundraising activities in support of The College of Medicine, an alternative medicine lobby group in the UK linked to Prince Charles.

He supports a number of other charities, including the Prison Phoenix Trust in England, and the London-based Evidence for Development which seeks to improve the lives of the world’s most needy people by preventing famines and delivering food aid, for both of which he is an active patron.

In 2010, Irons starred in a promotional video for "The 1billionhungry project" – a worldwide drive to attract at least one million signatures to a petition calling on international leaders to move hunger to the top of the political agenda.

Irons was named Goodwill Ambassador of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations in 2011. He provided the narration of the 2013 documentary "Sahaya Going Beyond" about the work of the charity Sahaya International.

In November 2015, Irons supported the No Cold Homes campaign by the UK charity Turn2us. Irons was one of nearly thirty celebrities, who included Helen Mirren, Hugh Laurie and Ed Sheeran, to donate items of winter clothing to the campaign, with the proceeds used to help people in the UK struggling to keep their homes warm in winter.

Irons is a patron of the Chiltern Shakespeare Company, which produces Shakespearea plays annually in Beaconsfield, Buckinghamshire, and a London-based drama school, The Associated Studios. Irons was bestowed an Honorary Life Membership by the University College Dublin Law Society in September 2008, in honour of his contribution to television, film, audio, music, and theatre. Also in 2008, Irons was awarded an Honorary Doctorate by Southampton Solent University. On 20 July 2016, Irons was announced as the first Chancellor of Bath Spa University.

Irons married Julie Hallam in 1969, but they divorced later that year. He married Irish actress Sinéad Cusack on 28 March 1978. They have two sons, Samuel "Sam" Irons (born 1978), who works as a photographer, and Maximilian "Max" Irons (born 1985), also an actor. Both of Irons' sons have appeared in films with their father. Irons' wife and children are Catholic; Irons has also been described as a practising Catholic, but he has stated:

He owns Kilcoe Castle near Ballydehob, County Cork, Ireland and had the castle painted pink. He also has another Irish residence in The Liberties of Dublin, as well as a home in his birth town of Cowes and a house and barn in Watlington, Oxfordshire. Irons is fluent in French.



</doc>
<doc id="25695" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25695" title="Russell Crowe">
Russell Crowe

Russell Ira Crowe (born 7 April 1964) is an actor, film producer and musician. Although a New Zealand citizen, he has lived most of his life in Australia. He came to international attention for his role as the Roman General Maximus Decimus Meridius in the 2000 historical epic film "Gladiator", directed by Ridley Scott, for which Crowe won an Academy Award for Best Actor, a Broadcast Film Critics Association Award for Best Actor, an Empire Award for Best Actor and a London Film Critics Circle Award for Best Actor and 10 further nominations for best actor.

Crowe appeared as the tobacco firm whistle blower Jeffrey Wigand in the 1999 film "The Insider", for which he received five awards as best actor and seven nominations in the same category. In 2001, Crowe's portrayal of mathematician and Nobel Prize winner John F. Nash in the biopic "A Beautiful Mind" brought him numerous awards, including a BAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Leading Role, a Golden Globe Award for Best Actor in a Motion Picture Drama and a Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Male Actor in a Leading Role.

Crowe's other films include "Romper Stomper" (1992), "L.A. Confidential" (1997), "" (2003), "Cinderella Man" (2005), "American Gangster" (2007), "State of Play" (2009), "Robin Hood" (2010), "Les Misérables" (2012), "Man of Steel" (2013) and "Noah" (2014). In 2015, Crowe made his directorial debut with "The Water Diviner", in which he also starred. Crowe's work has earned him several accolades during his career and including a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame, three consecutive Academy Award nominations (1999–2001), one Golden Globe Award for Best Actor, one BAFTA, and an Academy Award. Crowe has also been the co-owner of the National Rugby League (NRL) team South Sydney Rabbitohs since 2006.

Crowe was born on 7 April 1964 in the Wellington suburb of Strathmore Park, the son of Jocelyn Yvonne (née Wemyss) and John Alexander Crowe, both of whom were film set caterers; his father also managed a hotel. Crowe's maternal grandfather, Stan Wemyss, was a cinematographer who was named an MBE for filming footage of World War II. Crowe's paternal grandfather, John Doubleday Crowe, was from Wrexham, Wales, while one of Crowe's maternal great-great-grandmothers was Māori. Crowe also has English, German, Irish, Italian, Norwegian, Scottish, Swedish, and Welsh ancestry. He is a cousin of former New Zealand cricket captains Martin Crowe and Jeff Crowe, and nephew of cricketer Dave Crowe. Russell has built a cricket field named for his uncle.

When Crowe was four years old, his family moved to Sydney, Australia, where his parents pursued a career in set catering. The producer of the Australian TV series "Spyforce" was his mother's godfather, and Crowe (at age five or six) was hired for a line of dialogue in one episode, opposite series star Jack Thompson (in 1994 Thompson played the father of Crowe's character in "The Sum of Us"). Crowe also appeared briefly in the serial "The Young Doctors".

Crowe was educated at Vaucluse Public School but later moved to Sydney Boys High School. When he was 14, his family moved back to New Zealand where, along with his brother Terry, he attended Auckland Grammar School with cousins Martin Crowe and Jeff Crowe. He then continued his secondary education at Mount Roskill Grammar School, which he left at the age 16 to pursue his ambition of becoming an actor.

Crowe began his performing career as a musician in the early 1980s, under guidance from his good friend Tom Sharplin, when he performed under the stage name "Russ Le Roq". He released several New Zealand singles including "I Just Want To Be Like Marlon Brando", "Pier 13", "Shattered Glass", none of which charted. He managed an Auckland music venue called "The Venue" in 1984. When he was 18, he was featured in "A Very Special Person...", a promotional video for the theology/ministry course at Avondale College, a Seventh-day Adventist tertiary education provider in New South Wales.

Crowe returned to Australia at age 21, intending to apply to the National Institute of Dramatic Art. "I was working in a theatre show, and talked to a guy who was then the head of technical support at NIDA", Crowe has recalled. "I asked him what he thought about me spending three years at NIDA. He told me it'd be a waste of time. He said, 'You already do the things you go there to learn, and you've been doing it for most of your life, so there's nothing to teach you but bad habits.'" From 1986 to 1988, he was given his first professional role by director Daniel Abineri, in a New Zealand production of "The Rocky Horror Show". He played the role of Eddie/Dr Scott. He repeated this performance in a further Australian production of the show, which also toured New Zealand. In 1987, Crowe spent six months busking when he could not find other work. In the 1988 Australian production of "Blood Brothers", Crowe played the role of Mickey. He was also cast again by Daniel Abineri in the role of Johnny, in the stage musical "Bad Boy Johnny and the Prophets of Doom" in 1989.

After appearing in the TV series "Neighbours" and "Living with the Law," Crowe was cast by Faith Martin in his first film, "The Crossing" (1990), a small-town love triangle directed by George Ogilvie. Before production started, a film-student protégé of Ogilvie, Steve Wallace, hired Crowe for the film "Blood Oath" (1990) (aka "Prisoners of the Sun"), which was released a month earlier than "The Crossing", although actually filmed later. In 1992, Crowe starred in the first episode of the second series of "Police Rescue." Also in 1992, Crowe starred in "Romper Stomper", an Australian film which followed the exploits and downfall of a racist skinhead group in blue-collar suburban Melbourne, directed by Geoffrey Wright and co-starring Jacqueline McKenzie. For the role, Crowe won an Australian Film Institute (AFI) award for Best Actor, following up from his Best Supporting Actor award for "Proof" in 1991.
In 2015 it was reported that Crowe had applied for Australian citizenship in 2006 and again in 2013 but was rejected because he failed to fulfill the residency requirements. However, Australia's Immigration Department said it had no record of any such application by Crowe.

After initial success in Australia, Crowe first starred in a Canadian production in 1993, "For the Moment", before concentrating on American films. He co-starred with Denzel Washington in "Virtuosity" (the duo later appearing together in American Gangster) and with Sharon Stone in "The Quick and the Dead" in 1995. He went on to become a three-time Oscar nominee, winning the Academy Award as Best Actor in 2000 for "Gladiator". Crowe was awarded the (Australian) Centenary Medal in 2001 for "service to Australian society and Australian film production."

Crowe received three consecutive best actor Oscar nominations, for "The Insider", "Gladiator" and "A Beautiful Mind". Crowe won the best actor award for "A Beautiful Mind" at the 2002 BAFTA award ceremony, as well as the Golden Globe and Screen Actors Guild Award for the same performance. Although nominated for an Academy Award, he lost to Denzel Washington.

All three films were also nominated for best picture, and both "Gladiator" and "A Beautiful Mind" won the award. Within the six-year stretch from 1997 to 2003, he also starred in two other best picture nominees, "L.A. Confidential" and "". In 2005, he re-teamed with "A Beautiful Mind" director Ron Howard for "Cinderella Man". In 2006, he re-teamed with "Gladiator" director Ridley Scott for "A Good Year", the first of two consecutive collaborations (the second being "American Gangster" co-starring again with Denzel Washington, released in late 2007). While the light romantic comedy of "A Good Year" was not greatly received, Crowe seemed pleased with the film, telling STV in an interview that he thought it would be enjoyed by fans of his other films.

In recent years, Crowe's box office standing has declined. The Hollywood stock market (HSX) share Russell Crowe (RCROW), issued in 1998, however maintains constant accretion. Crowe appeared in "Robin Hood", a film based on the Robin Hood legend, directed by Ridley Scott and released on 14 May 2010.
Crowe starred in the 2010 Paul Haggis film "The Next Three Days", an adaptation of the 2008 French film "Pour Elle".

After a year off acting, Crowe played Jackknife in "The Man with the Iron Fists", opposite RZA. He took on the role of Inspector Javert in the musical film of "Les Misérables" (2012), and portrayed Superman's biological father, Jor-El, in the Christopher Nolan produced Superman film, "Man of Steel", released in the summer of 2013. In 2014, he played a gangster in the film adaptation of Mark Helprin's 1983 novel "Winter's Tale", and the title role in the Darren Aronofsky film "Noah". In June 2013, Crowe signed to make his directional debut with an historical drama film "The Water Diviner", which he also starred in alongside Jacqueline McKenzie, Olga Kurylenko, Jai Courtney. The film focused on the time of 1919 and was produced by Troy Lum, Andrew Mason and Keith Rodger. Crowe also starred in "The Mummy" (2017).

In the 1980s, Crowe, going under the name of "Russ le Roq", recorded a song titled "I Want To Be Like Marlon Brando".

In the 1980s, Crowe and friend Billy Dean Cochran formed a band, "Roman Antix", which later evolved into the Australian rock band 30 Odd Foot of Grunts (abbreviated to TOFOG). Crowe performed lead vocals and guitar for the band, which formed in 1992. The band released "The Photograph Kills EP" in 1995, as well as three full-length records, "Gaslight" (1998), "Bastard Life or Clarity" (2001) and "Other Ways of Speaking" (2003). In 2000, TOFOG performed shows in London, Los Angeles and the now famous run of shows at Stubbs in Austin, Texas which became a live DVD that was released in 2001, called "Texas". In 2001, the band came to the US for major press, radio and TV appearances for the "Bastard Life or Clarity" release and returned to Stubbs in Austin, Texas to kick off a sold out US tour with dates in Austin, Boulder, Chicago, Portland, San Francisco, Los Angeles, Philadelphia, New York City and the last show at the famous Stone Pony in Asbury Park, New Jersey.

In early 2005, 30 Odd Foot of Grunts as a group had "dissolved/evolved" with Crowe feeling his future music would take a new direction. He began a collaboration with Alan Doyle of the Canadian band Great Big Sea, and with it a new band emerged: The Ordinary Fear of God which also involved some members of the previous TOFOG line-up. A new single, "Raewyn", was released in April 2005 and an album entitled "My Hand, My Heart" which was released and is available for download on iTunes. The album includes a tribute song to actor Richard Harris, who became Crowe's friend during the making of "Gladiator".

Russell Crowe & The Ordinary Fear of God set out to break the new band in by performing a successful sold out series of dates of Australia in 2005, and then in 2006, returned to the US to promote their new release "My Hand, My Heart" with another sold-out US Tour and major press, radio and television appearances.
In March 2010, Russell Crowe & The Ordinary Fear of God's version of the John Williamson song "Winter Green" was included on a new compilation album "The Absolute Best of John Williamson: 40 Years True Blue", commemorating the singer-songwriter's milestone of 40 years in the Australian music industry. As of May 2011, there are plans to release a new Russell Crowe & The Ordinary Fear of God recording (co-written with Alan Doyle) and for a US tour which would be the first live dates in the US since 2006.

On 2 August 2011, the third collaboration between Crowe and Doyle was released on iTunes as "The Crowe/Doyle Songbook Vol III", featuring nine original songs followed by their acoustic demo counterparts (for a total of 18 tracks). Danielle Spencer does guest vocals on most tracks. The release coincided with a pair of live performances at the LSPU Hall in St. John's, Newfoundland. The digital album was released as download versions only on Amazon.com, iTunes, spotify. The album has since charted at No. 72 on the Canadian Albums Chart.
On 26 September 2011, Crowe appeared on-stage at Rogers Arena in Vancouver in the middle of Keith Urban's concert. He sang a cover of Folsom Prison Blues, before joining the rest of the band in a rendition of "The Joker". On 18 August 2012, Crowe appeared along with Doyle at the Harpa Concert Hall in Reykjavík, Iceland as part of the city's Menningarnótt program. They also appeared at downtown bars, "Gaukurinn" and "Kex."

During location filming of "Cinderella Man", Crowe made a donation to a Jewish elementary school whose library had been damaged as a result of arson. A note with an anti-Semitic message had been left at the scene. Crowe called school officials to express his concern and wanted his message relayed to the students. The school's building fund received donations from throughout Canada and the amount of Crowe's donation was not disclosed.

On another occasion, Crowe donated $200,000 to a struggling primary school near his home in rural Australia. The money went towards an $800,000 project to construct a swimming pool at the school. Crowe's sympathies were sparked when a pupil drowned at the nearby Coffs Harbour beach in 2001, and he believes the pool will help students become better swimmers and improve their knowledge of water safety. At the opening ceremony he dove into the pool fully clothed as soon as the venue was declared open. Nana Glen principal Laurie Renshall says, "The many things he does up here, people just don't know about. We've been trying to get a pool for 10 years."

Crowe began an on-again, off-again relationship with Australian singer Danielle Spencer in 1989, when they co-starred in the 1990 film "The Crossing". In 2000, Crowe was romantically involved with his co-star Meg Ryan while on the set of their film "Proof of Life". Crowe and Spencer reconciled in 2001, and married in April 2003, at Crowe's cattle property in Nana Glen, New South Wales. They have two sons: Charles Spencer Crowe (born 21 December 2003) and Tennyson Spencer Crowe (born 7 July 2006). In October 2012, it was reported that Crowe and Spencer had separated. 

Crowe resides in Australia. In 2011, Crowe and his family moved to a house in Sydney's Rose Bay. Crowe also owns a house in the North Queensland city of Townsville, purchased in May 2008. He is rather frugal in his spending and is known to drive an old Jeep.

In the beginning of 2009, despite not having Australian citizenship, Crowe appeared in a series of special edition postage stamps called "Legends of the Screen", featuring Australian actors. He, Geoffrey Rush, Cate Blanchett and Nicole Kidman each appear twice in the series, once as themselves and once as their Academy Award-winning character.

Crowe stated in November 2007 that he would like to be baptised as a Christian and felt that he had put it off for too long. "I do believe there are more important things than what is in the mind of a man", he said. "There is something much bigger that drives us all. I'm willing to take that leap of faith."

In June 2010, Crowe, who had started smoking when he was only 10, announced he had quit for the sake of his two sons. In November 2010, Crowe told David Letterman that he had been smoking more than 60 cigarettes a day for 36 years of his life, and that he had fallen off the wagon the previous night and smoked heavily.

On 9 March 2005, Crowe revealed to "GQ" magazine that Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) agents had approached him prior to the 73rd Academy Awards in March 2001, and told him that the terrorist group al-Qaeda wanted to kidnap him. Crowe told the magazine that it was the first time he had ever heard of al-Qaeda and was quoted as saying: "You get this late-night call from the FBI when you arrive in Los Angeles, and they're, like, absolutely full-on. 'We've got to talk to you now before you do anything. We have to have a discussion with you, Mr. Crowe.'" Crowe recalled that: "It was something to do with some recording picked up by a French policewoman, I think, in either Libya or Algiers...it was about taking iconographic Americans out of the picture as a sort of cultural destabilisation plan."

Between 1999 and 2005, Crowe was involved in four altercations which gave him a reputation for having a bad temper.

In 1999, Crowe was involved in a scuffle at the Plantation Hotel in Coffs Harbour, Australia, which was caught on security video. Two men were acquitted of using the video in an attempt to blackmail Crowe.

Four years later, when part of Crowe's appearance at the 2002 BAFTA awards was cut out to fit into the BBC's tape-delayed broadcast, Crowe used strong language during an argument with producer Malcolm Gerrie. The part cut was a poem in tribute to actor Richard Harris, and it was cut for copyright reasons. Crowe later apologised, saying "What I said to him may have been a little bit more passionate than now, in the cold light of day, I would have liked it to have been."

Later that year, Crowe was alleged to have been involved in a brawl with businessman and fellow New Zealander Eric Watson inside the London branch of Zuma, a fashionable Japanese restaurant chain. The fight was broken up by British actor Ross Kemp.

In June 2005, Crowe was arrested and charged with Second-Degree Assault by New York City police after he threw a telephone at the concierge of the Mercer Hotel who refused to help him place a call when the system did not work from his room; he was charged with Fourth-Degree Criminal Possession of a Weapon (the telephone). The concierge was treated for a facial laceration. After his arrest, Crowe underwent a perp walk, a procedure customary in New York City, exposing the handcuffed suspect to the news media to take pictures. This procedure was under discussion as potentially violating Article 5 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Crowe later described the incident as "possibly the most shameful situation that I've ever gotten myself in..." . Crowe pleaded guilty and was conditionally discharged. Before the trial, he settled a lawsuit filed by the concierge, Nestor Estrada. Terms of the settlement were not disclosed, but amounts in the six-figure range have been reported.

The telephone incident had a generally negative impact on Crowe's public image, an example of negative public relations in the mass media, although Crowe had made a point of befriending Australian journalists in an effort to influence his image. A professional public image as "The Gladiator" had to compete alongside one as "the telephone throwing actor". For example, the "South Park" episode, "The New Terrance and Phillip Movie Trailer" revolves around a lampooning of his aggressive tendencies. Crowe commented on the ongoing media perpetuation in November 2010, five years into the process, during an interview with American television talk show host and journalist Charlie Rose: "it affected me psychologically" (...) "it indelibly changed me."

Crowe publicly endorsed Barack Obama, whom he called "the light and the future", in the United States presidential election, 2012, and urged Americans to vote for him. He also publicly endorsed Julia Gillard, whom he called "Leader through tough times", in the Australian Labor Party leadership spill, June 2013, although he is unable to vote in Australia as he is not an Australian citizen. Gillard lost the Labor leadership to Kevin Rudd, who subsequently lost the Australian federal election, 2013.

Crowe says he follows New Zealand's rugby union team, the "All Blacks", and Australia in any other sport. Two of his cousins, Martin Crowe and Jeff Crowe, captained the Black Caps New Zealand international cricket team.

Crowe has been a supporter of the rugby league football team the South Sydney Rabbitohs since childhood. Since his rise to fame as an actor, he has continued appearing at home games, and supported the financially troubled club. Following the Super League war of the 1990s Crowe made an attempt to use his Hollywood connections to convince Ted Turner, rival of Super League's Rupert Murdoch, to save the Rabbitohs before they were forced from the National Rugby League competition for two years. In 1999 Crowe paid $42,000 at auction for the brass bell used to open the inaugural rugby league match in Australia in 1908 at a fund-raiser to assist Souths' legal battle for re-inclusion in the League. In 2005, he made the Rabbitohs the first club team in Australia to be sponsored by a film, when he negotiated a deal to advertise his film "Cinderella Man" on their jerseys.
On 19 March 2006, the voting members of the South Sydney club voted (in a 75.8% majority) to allow Crowe and businessman Peter Holmes à Court to purchase 75% of the organisation, leaving 25% ownership with the members. It cost them A$3 million, and they received four of eight seats on the board of directors. A six-part television miniseries entitled "South Side Story" depicting the takeover aired in Australia in 2007.
On 5 November 2006, Crowe appeared on "The Tonight Show with Jay Leno" to announce that Firepower International was sponsoring the South Sydney Rabbitohs for $3 million over three years. During a "Tonight Show with Jay Leno" appearance, Crowe showed viewers a Rabbitoh playing jersey with Firepower's name emblazoned on it.

Crowe helped to organise a rugby league game that took place at the University of North Florida, in Jacksonville, Florida, between the South Sydney Rabbitohs and the European Super League champions Leeds Rhinos on 26 January 2008 (Australia Day). Crowe told ITV Local Yorkshire the game was not a marketing exercise.
Crowe wrote a letter of apology to a Sydney newspaper following the sacking of South Sydney's coach Jason Taylor and one of their players David Fa'alogo after a drunken altercation between the two at the end of the 2009 NRL season.
Also in 2009 Crowe persuaded young England international forward Sam Burgess to sign with the Rabbitohs over other clubs that were competing for his signature, after inviting Burgess and his mother to the set of "Robin Hood", which he was filming in Britain at the time.

Crowe's influence helped to persuade noted player Greg Inglis to renege on his deal to join the Brisbane Broncos and sign for the Rabbitohs for 2011.
In 2010, the NRL was investigating Crowe's business relationships with a number of media and entertainment companies including Channel Nine, Channel Seven, ANZ Stadium, and V8 Supercars in relation to the South Sydney Rabbitohs' salary cap.

In 2011, Souths also announced a corporate partnership with the bookmaking conglomerate Luxbet.
Previously, Crowe had been prominent in trying to prevent gambling being associated with the Rabbitohs.
In May 2011, Crowe helped arrange to have Fox broadcast the 2011 State of Origin series live for the first time in the United States, in addition to the NRL Grand Final.
In November 2012 the South Sydney Rabbitohs confirmed that Russell Crowe was selling his 37.5% stake in the club.
At the Rabbitohs Annual General Meeting on 3 March 2013, Chairman Nick Pappas claimed Crowe "would not be selling his shareholding in the short-to-medium term and at this stage has no intention of selling at all".

Crowe was a guest presenter at the 2013 Dally M Awards and presented the prestigious Dally M Medal to winner Cooper Cronk. Russell was present at the 2014 NRL Grand Final when the Rabbitohs won the NRL premiership for the first time in 43 years.

Crowe watches and plays cricket, and captained the 'Australian' Team containing Steve Waugh against an English side in the 'Hollywood Ashes' Cricket Match. On 17 July 2009 Crowe took to the commentary box for the British sports channel, Sky Sports, as the 'third man' during the second Test of the 2009 Ashes series, between England and Australia. He is friends with Lloyd Carr, the former coach of the University of Michigan Wolverines American football team, and Carr used Crowe's movie "Cinderella Man" to motivate his 2006 team following a 7–5 season the previous year. Upon hearing of this, Crowe called Carr and invited him to Australia to address his Rugby league team, the South Sydney Rabbitohs, which Carr did the following summer. In September 2007, after Carr came under fire following the Wolverines' 0–2 start, Crowe travelled to Ann Arbor, Michigan for the Wolverines' 15 September game against Notre Dame to show his support for Carr. He addressed the team before the game and watched from the sidelines as the Wolverines defeated the Irish 38–0.
Crowe is also a fan of the National Football League. On 22 October 2007, Crowe appeared in the booth of a Monday night game between the Indianapolis Colts and the Jacksonville Jaguars.

Crowe has appeared in 43 films and three television series since his career began in 1985. He won the Academy Award for Best Actor for "Gladiator" (2000) and was nominated twice more for "The Insider" (1999) and "A Beautiful Mind" (2001), making him the ninth actor to receive three consecutive Academy Award nominations. He has also received five Golden Globe Award nominations (winning one), three BAFTA Award nominations (winning one), and three Screen Actors Guild Award nominations (winning one).


</doc>
<doc id="21111" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21111" title="Nicolas Cage">
Nicolas Cage

Nicolas Kim Coppola (born January 7, 1964), known professionally as Nicolas Cage, is an American actor, director and producer. During his early career, Cage starred in a variety of films such as "Valley Girl" (1983), "Racing with the Moon" (1984), "Birdy" (1984), "Peggy Sue Got Married" (1986), "Raising Arizona" (1987), "Moonstruck" (1987), "Vampire's Kiss" (1989), "Wild at Heart" (1990), "Fire Birds" (1990), "Honeymoon in Vegas" (1992), and "Red Rock West" (1993).

Cage received an Academy Award, a Golden Globe, and Screen Actors Guild Award for his performance as an alcoholic Hollywood writer in "Leaving Las Vegas" (1995) before coming to the attention of wider audiences with mainstream films, such as "The Rock" (1996), "Face/Off" (1997), "Con Air" (1997) and "City of Angels" (1998). He earned his second Academy Award nomination for his performance as Charlie and Donald Kaufman in "Adaptation" (2002). He also directed the film "Sonny" (2002), for which he was nominated for Grand Special Prize at Deauville Film Festival. Cage owns the production company Saturn Films and has produced films such as "Shadow of the Vampire" (2000) and "The Life of David Gale" (2003).

He has also appeared in "National Treasure" (2004), "Lord of War" (2005), "" (2009), and "Kick-Ass" (2010). Films such as "Ghost Rider" (2007) and "Knowing" (2009) were box office successes. In the 2010s, he starred in "The Croods" and "Joe".

Cage was born in Long Beach, California, to August Coppola, a professor of literature, and Joy Vogelsang, a dancer and choreographer. He was raised in a Catholic family. His father was of Italian descent and his mother was of German and Polish descent. His paternal grandparents were composer Carmine Coppola and actress Italia Pennino, and his paternal great-grandparents were immigrants from Bernalda, Basilicata. Through his father, he is a nephew of director Francis Ford Coppola and of actress Talia Shire, and the cousin of directors Roman Coppola and Sofia Coppola, film producer Gian-Carlo Coppola, and actors Robert Carmine and Jason Schwartzman.

Cage's two brothers are New York radio personality Marc "The Cope" Coppola and director Christopher Coppola. He attended Beverly Hills High School, which is known for its many alumni who became entertainers. He aspired to act from an early age and also attended UCLA School of Theater, Film and Television. His first non-cinematic acting experience was in a school production of "Golden Boy". He cites James Dean as the key inspiration for his career, saying, "I started acting because I wanted to be James Dean. I saw him in "Rebel Without a Cause", "East of Eden". Nothing affected me—no rock song, no classical music—the way Dean affected me in "Eden". It blew my mind. I was like, 'That's what I want to do'."

At fifteen years old he tried to convince his uncle, Francis Ford Coppola, to give him a screen test, telling him "I'll show you acting." His outburst was met with "silence in the car". By this stage of his career, Coppola had already directed Marlon Brando, Al Pacino, Gene Hackman and Robert De Niro. To avoid the appearance of nepotism as Coppola's nephew, he changed his name early in his career to Nicolas Cage, inspired in part by the Marvel Comics superhero Luke Cage.

Since his film debut with a minor role in "Fast Times at Ridgemont High" (1982), opposite Judge Reinhold and Sean Penn, Cage has appeared in a wide range of films, both mainstream and offbeat. He auditioned for the role of Dallas Winston in his uncle's film "The Outsiders", based on S.E. Hinton's novel, but lost to Matt Dillon. He was also in Coppola's films "Rumble Fish" and "Peggy Sue Got Married."

Other Cage roles included appearances in the acclaimed 1987 romantic-comedy film "Moonstruck", also starring Cher; the Coen Brothers cult-classic comedy "Raising Arizona"; David Lynch's 1990 film "Wild at Heart"; a lead role in Martin Scorsese's 1999 New York City paramedic drama "Bringing Out the Dead"; and Ridley Scott's 2003 black comedy crime film "Matchstick Men", in which he played a con artist with obsessive-compulsive disorder.
Cage has been nominated twice for an Academy Award, winning once for his performance as a suicidal alcoholic in "Leaving Las Vegas". His other nomination was for his portrayal of real-life screenwriter Charlie Kaufman and Kaufman's fictional twin Donald in "Adaptation." Despite these successes, most of his lower-profile films have performed poorly at the box office compared to his mainstream action/adventure roles. The suspense thriller "8mm" (1999) is considered a cult film. He took the lead role in the 2001 film "Captain Corelli's Mandolin" and learned to play the mandolin from scratch for the part. He made his directorial debut with 2002's "Sonny". In 2005, two films he headlined, "Lord of War" and "The Weather Man", failed to find a significant audience despite nationwide releases and good reviews for his performances. Poor reviews for "The Wicker Man" resulted in low box office sales. The much criticized "Ghost Rider" (2007), based on the Marvel Comics character, fared better, earning more than $45 million (the top earner) during its opening weekend and over $208 million worldwide through the weekend ending on March 25, 2007. Also in 2007, he starred in "Next", which shared the concept of a glimpse into an alternate timeline with Cage's film, "The Family Man" (2000).

Most of Cage's movies that have achieved financial success were in the action/adventure genre. In his second-highest-grossing film to date, "National Treasure", he plays an eccentric historian who goes on a dangerous adventure to find treasure hidden by the Founding Fathers of the United States. Other action hits include "The Rock", in which Cage plays a young FBI chemical weapons expert who infiltrates Alcatraz Island in the hope of neutralizing a terrorist threat, "Face/Off", a John Woo film where he plays both a hero and a villain, and "World Trade Center", director Oliver Stone's film about the September 11 attacks. He had a small but notable role as the Chinese criminal mastermind Dr. Fu Manchu in Rob Zombie's fake trailer "Werewolf Women of the S.S." from the B-movie double feature "Grindhouse".

In November 2007, Cage was spotted backstage at a "Ring of Honor" wrestling show in New York City researching for the lead role for "The Wrestler". However, Cage dropped out of production shortly afterwards because he felt that he did not have enough time to prepare for the role and director Darren Aronofsky preferred Mickey Rourke for the lead part. Rourke would go on to receive an Academy Award nomination for his performance.
In an interview with slashfilm.com, Aronofsky said of Cage's decision to leave the film that "Nic was a complete gentleman, and he understood that my heart was with Mickey and he stepped aside. I have so much respect for Nic Cage as an actor and I think it really could have worked with Nic but ... you know, Nic was incredibly supportive of Mickey and he is old friends with Mickey and really wanted to help with this opportunity, so he pulled himself out of the race."
In 2008, Cage appeared as Joe, a contract killer who undergoes a change of heart while on a work outing in Bangkok, in the film "Bangkok Dangerous". The film is shot by the Pang Brothers and has a distinct South-East Asian flavor. In 2009, Cage starred in the science fiction thriller "Knowing", directed by Alex Proyas. In the film, he plays an MIT professor who examines the contents of a time capsule unearthed at his son's elementary school. Startling predictions found inside the capsule that have already come true lead him to believe that the world is going to end at the close of the week, and that he and his son are somehow involved in the destruction. The film received mainly negative reviews but was the box office winner on its opening weekend. Also in 2009, Cage starred in the film "", directed by acclaimed German director Werner Herzog. He portrayed a corrupt police officer with gambling, drug and alcohol addictions. The film was very well received by critics, holding a rating of 87% positive reviews on review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes. Cage received lauds for his performance, with Michael Phillips of the "Chicago Tribune" writing "Herzog has found his ideal interpreter, a performer whose truth lies deep in the artifice of performance: ladies and gentlemen, Nicolas Cage, at his finest." This film reunited Cage with Eva Mendes, who played his love interest in "Ghost Rider". In 2010, Cage starred in the period piece "Season of the Witch", playing a 14th-century knight transporting a girl accused of causing the Black Plague to a monastery, and "The Sorcerer's Apprentice", in which he played the sorcerer.

In 2012, Cage reprised his role in "Ghost Rider's" sequel "." He voiced the character Grug Crood in the animated film "The Croods", which was released in 2013. "The Croods" received positive reviews from critics and was a box office success grossing $585 million against a budget of $135 million.

On February 12, 2016, Cage was cast alongside Selma Blair and Anne Winters in Brian Taylor's horror comedy film, "Mom and Dad". The film was released in theaters on January 19, 2018.

On June 7, 2017, Cage was cast in the action thriller film, "Mandy". The film premiered on January 19, 2018 at the 2018 Sundance Film Festival.

Cage made his directorial debut In 2002 with "Sonny", a low-budget drama starring James Franco as a male prostitute whose mother (Brenda Blethyn) serves as his pimp. Cage had a small role in the film, which received poor reviews and a short run in a limited number of theatres. Cage's producing career includes "Shadow of the Vampire", the first effort from Saturn Films.

In early December 2006, Cage announced at the Bahamas International Film Festival that he planned to curtail his future acting endeavors to pursue other interests. On "The Dresden Files" for the Sci-Fi Channel, Cage is listed as the executive producer.

Cage, an avid comic book fan, auctioned a collection of 400 vintage comics through Heritage Auctions for over $1.6 million in 2002.
In 2007, he created a comic book with his son Weston, called "Voodoo Child", which was published by Virgin Comics.
Cage is a fan and collector of painter and underground comic artist Robert Williams. He has written introductions for "Juxtapoz" magazine and purchased the painting "Death On The Boards".

Since the beginning of Cage's career, many critics, including Roger Ebert, have described his performance as "operatic." In February 2011, Cage said that, at a certain point in his career, he realized that he had developed his own method of acting, which he described as "Nouveau Shamanic." He noted, "at some point I'll have to write a book" about it. Cage later explained that he drew the inspiration for the name from the book "The Way of the Actor" by Brian Bates, in which he read about the parallel between the ancient shamans and thespians.

In 1988, Cage began dating actress Christina Fulton, who later bore their son, Weston Coppola Cage (born December 26, 1990). Weston was the lead singer of the black metal band Eyes of Noctum, which broke up in 2012. Arsh Anubis, his new band of the same genre, was formed in 2011. Weston also appeared in his father's film "Lord of War" as Vladimir, a young Ukrainian mechanic who quickly disarms a Mil Mi-24 helicopter. Weston and his wife Danielle have a son, Lucian Augustus Coppola Cage, born July 1, 2014.

Cage has been married three times. His first wife was actress Patricia Arquette (married in April 1995, divorce finalized in 2001).

Cage's second marriage was to singer and songwriter Lisa Marie Presley, daughter of Elvis Presley. Cage is an Elvis fan and used the star as the base of his performance in "Wild at Heart". Presley and Cage married on August 10, 2002 and filed for divorce on November 25, 2002, a divorce which was finalized on May 16, 2004. The divorce proceeding was longer than the marriage.

Cage's third wife is Alice Kim (born December 27, 1983), a former waitress who previously worked at the Los Angeles restaurant Kabuki and at the Los Angeles-based Korean nightclub, Le Privé. She gave birth to their son, Kal-El, (after Superman's birth name) on October 3, 2005. They were married at a private ranch in Northern California on July 30, 2004. The couple separated in January 2016.

Cage grew up in a family of Catholic background, but does not talk about religion publicly and refuses to answer religion-connected questions in his interviews. When asked about the movie "Knowing" being a religion-themed film or not, Cage replied, "Any of my personal beliefs or opinions runs the risk of impinging on your own relationship with the movie. I feel movies are best left enigmatic, left raising more questions than answers. I don't want to ever preach. So [whatever you get] from the movie [is] far more interesting than [anything] I could ever offer."

During his visit to University of California, Santa Cruz he stated that he is not a politically active actor and that he can do it in his work as he learned more about nuclear power from the movie "The China Syndrome".

Cage has been called one of the most generous stars in Hollywood. He donated $2 million to Amnesty International for them to use to offer rehabilitation shelters, medical services and psychological and reintegration services to some of the 300,000 children forced to fight in conflicts across the world. He has also donated $1 million to the victims of Hurricane Katrina. He became the first artist to support ArtWorks, an artist engagement program to raise awareness of fundamental rights at work, including freedom from slavery and from child labor. Cage has also been honored with Humanitarian award from United Nations for his works and appointed as an UN ambassador for Global Justice. He led a campaign around the film "Lord of War" to raise awareness about international arms control, supported "Heal the Bay," the United Negro College Fund efforts, and the Royal United Hospital's Forever Friends Appeal to build intensive care units for babies.

Nicolas Cage was once considered one of Hollywood's highest-paid actors, earning $40 million in 2009 according to "Forbes", although he failed to make Forbes' Top 10 List in 2014.

Cage had a Malibu home where he and Kim lived, but sold the property in 2005 for $10 million. In 2004 he bought a property on Paradise Island, Bahamas. In May 2006, he bought a island in the Exuma archipelago, some southeast of Nassau and close to a similar island owned by Faith Hill and Tim McGraw.

He bought the medieval castle Schloss Neidstein in the Oberpfalz region in Germany in 2006 and sold it in 2009 for $2.5 million. His grandmother was German, living in Cochem an der Mosel.

In August 2007, Cage purchased "Grey Craig," a brick-and-stone country manor in Middletown, Rhode Island. With an estate occupying , the home has 12 bedrooms and 10 full bathrooms and overlooks the Atlantic Ocean. It borders the Norman Bird Sanctuary to the west. The sale ranked among the state of Rhode Island's most expensive residential purchases.

Also in 2007, the actor purchased Midford Castle in Somerset, England. Shortly after selling his German castle, Cage also put up his homes in Rhode Island, Louisiana, Nevada, and California, as well as a $7 million island in the Bahamas, for sale.

On July 14, 2009, the Internal Revenue Service filed documents in New Orleans in connection with a federal tax lien against property owned by Cage in Louisiana, concerning unpaid federal taxes. The IRS alleges that Cage failed to pay over $6.2 million in federal income tax for the year 2007. In addition, the Internal Revenue Service has another lien for more than $350,000 in unpaid taxes dating from 2002 to 2004. Cage filed a $20 million lawsuit on October 16, 2009, against his business manager, Samuel J. Levin, alleging negligence and fraud. The lawsuit states that Levin "had failed to pay taxes when they were due and had placed [Cage] in speculative and risky real estate investments 'resulting in (the actor) suffering catastrophic losses.'" Cage is also facing separate lawsuits from East West Bank and Red Curb Investments for unpaid, multimillion-dollar loans.

Samuel Levin filed a counter-complaint and responded to the lawsuit in a filing stating that he warned Cage that he was living beyond his means and urged him to spend less. Levin's filing states that "instead of listening to Levin, cross-defendant Cage (Coppola) spent most of his free time shopping for high ticket purchases, and wound up with 15 personal residences." Levin's complaint continued: "Likewise, Levin advised Coppola against buying a Gulfstream jet, against buying and owning a flotilla of yachts, against buying and owning a squadron of Rolls Royces, against buying millions of dollars in jewelry and art."

In his filing, Levin says that in 2007, Cage's "shopping spree entailed the purchase of three additional residences at a total cost of more than $33 million; the purchase of 22 automobiles (including 9 Rolls Royces); 12 purchases of expensive jewelry; and 47 purchases of artwork and exotic items." One of those exotic items was a dinosaur skull of a "Tarbosaurus" for which Nicolas Cage paid $276,000 in an auction after winning a bidding contest against Leonardo DiCaprio. After discovering that the "Tarbosaurus" skull was stolen, he has since returned it to the Mongolian authorities.

According to Cage, he owned the "Most Haunted House in America," a home located in the French Quarter of New Orleans, Louisiana. Known as "The LaLaurie House" after its former owner Delphine LaLaurie, the house was foreclosed and sold at auction on November 12, 2009 along with another New Orleans property for a total of $5.5 million, in the wake of Cage's financial problems.

His Bel Air home, which had six loans totaling $18 million on it, failed to sell at an April 2010 foreclosure auction despite an opening offer of $10.4 million, substantially less than the $35 million that Cage had originally tried to sell it for. The home, built in 1940 for $110,000, had been owned at different times by Dean Martin and singer Tom Jones. The home eventually sold in November 2010 for $10.5 million. Another home in Nevada also faces foreclosure auction.

In November 2011, Cage also sold his Action Comics 1 in an online auction for a record-breaking $2.16 million (the previous record being $1.5 million), to assist paying his tax liens and other debts. Cage purchased the comic in 1997 for $110,000.

Now worth around $25 million (as of May 2017), Cage is reportedly "taking [film] roles left and right" in order to pay off his remaining debts.

In December 2009, Christina Fulton sued Cage for $13 million and for the house in which she was living. The suit was in response to an order that she leave the dwelling; the order resulted from Cage's financial difficulties. The case was settled in June 2011.

On April 15, 2011, at 11:30 pm, Cage was arrested in New Orleans' French Quarter district for suspicion of domestic abuse battery, disturbing the peace and public intoxication, after a police officer was flagged down by onlookers after Cage allegedly grabbed his wife's upper arm while appearing to be under the influence of alcohol. Cage was held in police custody until a bail of $11,000 was posted by Duane "Dog" Chapman. He was later ordered to appear in court on May 31, 2011. On May 5, 2011, it was announced that the charges against Cage had been dropped.

For his contributions to the film industry, Cage was inducted into the Hollywood Walk of Fame in 1998 with a motion pictures star located at 7021 Hollywood Boulevard.

In May 2001, Cage was awarded an Honorary Doctorate in Fine Arts by California State University, Fullerton. He spoke at the commencement ceremony. Cage has also been nominated for an Academy Award twice. He won an Academy Award for Best Actor for his role in the film "Leaving Las Vegas" in 1995. He was nominated for a second one for his role in the film "Adaptation" in 2002. He also won a Golden Globe award, Screen Actors Guild award and many more awards for "Leaving Las Vegas". He has received nominations by the Golden Globe, Screen Actors Guild and BAFTA for his films "Adaptation", "Honeymoon in Vegas" and "Moonstruck." He has also won and been nominated for many other awards.




</doc>
<doc id="42148" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42148" title="Dustin Hoffman">
Dustin Hoffman

Dustin Lee Hoffman (born August 8, 1937) is an American actor and director, with a career in film, television, and theater since 1960. Hoffman has been known for his versatile portrayals of antiheroes and vulnerable characters. He won the Academy Award for Best Actor in 1980 for "Kramer vs. Kramer", and in 1989 for "Rain Man".

Hoffman first drew critical praise for starring in the play, "Eh?", for which he won a Theatre World Award and a Drama Desk Award. This achievement was soon followed by his breakthrough 1967 film role as Benjamin Braddock, the title character in "The Graduate". Since that time, Hoffman's career has largely been focused on the cinema, with sporadic returns to television and to the stage. Hoffman's films include "Midnight Cowboy", "Little Big Man", "Straw Dogs", "Papillon", "Lenny", "Marathon Man", "All the President's Men", "Kramer vs. Kramer", "Tootsie", "Rain Man", "Hook", and "Wag the Dog". He made his directorial debut in 2012, with "Quartet".

Along with 2 Academy Award wins, Hoffman has been nominated for 5 additional Academy Awards, and he was nominated for 13 Golden Globes, winning 6 (including an honorary award). He has won 4 BAFTAs, 3 Drama Desk Awards, 2 Emmy Awards, and a Genie Award. Hoffman received the AFI Life Achievement Award in 1999, and the Kennedy Center Honors Award in 2012, In 2016 he won the International Emmy Award for Best Actor for his work on "Roald Dahl's Esio Trot". 

Hoffman was born on August 8, 1937 in Los Angeles, California, the second son of Lillian (née Gold; 1909-1982) and Harry Hoffman (1908-1987). His father worked as a prop supervisor (set decorator) at Columbia Pictures before becoming a furniture salesman.

Hoffman was named after stage and silent screen actor, Dustin Farnum. His elder brother, Ronald, is a lawyer and economist. Hoffman is Jewish, from an Ashkenazi family of immigrants from Kiev, Ukraine, and Iași, Romania (the family's surname was spelled "Goikhman" in the Russian Empire). He does not speak Yiddish.

His upbringing was non-religious, and he has said, "I don’t have any memory of celebrating holidays growing up that were Jewish", and that he had 'realized' he was Jewish at around age 10.

Hoffman graduated from Los Angeles High School in 1955 and enrolled at Santa Monica College with the intention of studying medicine. He left after a year to join the Pasadena Playhouse, although when he told his family about his career goal, his Aunt Pearl warned him, "You can't be an actor. You are not good-looking enough." He also took classes at the Neighborhood Playhouse in New York City.

Hoffman initially hoped to become a classical pianist, having studied piano during much of his youth and in college. While at Santa Monica College, he also took an acting class, which he assumed would be easy, and "caught the acting bug." He recalls: "I just was not gifted in music. I did not have an ear." Now an aspiring actor, he spent the next ten years doing odd jobs, being unemployed, and struggling to get any available acting roles. He composed a song called "Shooting the Breeze" and Bette Midler wrote the words.

His first acting role was at the Pasadena Playhouse, alongside future Academy Award-winner, Gene Hackman. After two years there, Hackman headed for New York City, with Hoffman soon following. Hoffman, Hackman and Robert Duvall lived together in the 1960s, all three of them focused on finding acting jobs. Hackman remembers, "The idea that any of us would do well in films simply didn't occur to us. We just wanted to work." During this period, Hoffman got occasional television bit parts, including commercials but, needing income, he briefly left acting to teach.

In 1960, Hoffman was cast in a role in an Off-Broadway production and followed with a walk-on role in a Broadway production in 1961. Hoffman then studied at Actors Studio and became a dedicated method actor. Sidney W. Pink, a producer and 3D-movie pioneer, discovered him in one of his off-Broadway roles and cast him in "Madigan's Millions". Through the early and mid-1960s, Hoffman made appearances in television shows and movies, including "Naked City", "The Defenders" and "Hallmark Hall of Fame". His first critical success was in the play "Eh?", by Henry Livings, which had its US premiere at the Circle in the Square Downtown on October 16, 1966.

Hoffman made his film debut in "The Tiger Makes Out" in 1967, alongside Eli Wallach. In 1967, immediately after wrapping up principal filming on "The Tiger Makes Out", Hoffman flew from New York City to Fargo, North Dakota, where he directed productions of William Gibson's "Two for the Seesaw" and William Saroyan's "The Time of Your Life" for the Fargo-Moorhead Community Theatre. The $1,000 he received for the eight-week contract was all he had to hold him over until the funds from the movie materialized.

In 1966, director Mike Nichols auditioned Hoffman for a lead role in the Broadway musical "The Apple Tree", but rejected him because he could not sing well enough and gave Alan Alda the part. But Nichols was so impressed with Hoffman's overall audition he cast him as the male lead in the movie "The Graduate" (1967). Hoffman played the character of Benjamin Braddock, who returns to his wealthy parents' home in California after graduating from college. Confused about what to do with his life, he is seduced into having an affair with Mrs. Robinson, an alcoholic and a neurotic, and the wife of his father's law partner. This was Hoffman's first major role, and he received an Academy Award nomination for it but lost to Rod Steiger in "In the Heat of the Night".
Although "Life" magazine joked that "if Dustin Hoffman's face were his fortune, he'd be committed to a life of poverty", "The Graduate" was a gigantic box-office hit for Embassy Pictures, making Hoffman a major new star at the same time. The film received near-unanimous good reviews. "Time" magazine called Hoffman "a symbol of youth" who represented "a new breed of actors." The film's screenwriter, Buck Henry, notes that Hoffman's character made conventional good looks no longer necessary on screen:

Hoffman biographer Jeff Lenburg adds that "newspapers across the country were deluged with thousands of letters from fans," with one example published in the "New York Times": "I identified with Ben...I thought of him as a spiritual brother. He was confused about his future and about his place in the world, as I am. It's a film one digs, rather than understands intellectually."

"Turner Classic Movies" critic Rob Nixon notes that Hoffman represented "a new generation of actors." He credits Hoffman with breaking "the mold of the traditional movie star and brought to their roles a new candor, ethnicity, and eagerness to dive deep into complex, even unlikable characters." Nixon expands on the significance of the film to Hoffman's career: "In "The Graduate", he created a lasting resonance as Ben Braddock that made him an overnight sensation and set him on the road to becoming one of our biggest stars and most respected actors."

Hoffman, however, mostly credits director Mike Nichols for taking a great risk in giving him, a relative unknown, the starring role: "I don't know of another instance of a director at the height of his powers who would take a chance and cast someone like me in that part. It took tremendous courage."

Critic Sam Kashner observed strong similarities between Hoffman's character and that of Nichols when he previously acted with Elaine May in the comedy team of Nichols and May. "Just close your eyes and you'll hear a Mike Nichols—Elaine May routine in any number of scenes." Buck Henry also noticed that "Dustin picked up all these Nichols habits, which he used in the character. Those little noises he makes are straight from Mike," he says.

After completing "The Graduate," Hoffman turned down most of the film roles offered to him, preferring to go back to New York and continue performing in live theater. He returned to Broadway to appear in the title role of the musical, "Jimmy Shine". Hoffman won a Drama Desk Award for Outstanding Performance.

He was then offered the lead in "Midnight Cowboy" (1969), which he accepted partly to prove many critics were wrong about his acting range and the variety of characters he could portray. As author and critic Peter Biskind explains, "it was the very contrast between his preppy character in "The Graduate", and Ratso Rizzo" that appealed to Hoffman. "I had become troubled," recalls Hoffman, "by the reviews that I read of "The Graduate," that I was not a character actor, which I like to think of myself as. It hurt me. Some of the stuff in the press was brutal." Critics assumed that director Mike Nichols got lucky by finding a typical actor with average acting ability to play the part of Benjamin Braddock.

John Schlesinger, who would direct "Midnight Cowboy" and was seeking lead actors, held that same impression. Hoffman's performance as a button-down college graduate and track star was so convincing to Schlesinger, "he seemed unable to comprehend the fact that he was acting," notes Biskind. To help the director, whom he had never met, overcome that false impression, Hoffman met him in Times Square dressed as a homeless person, wearing a dirty raincoat, his hair slicked back and with an unshaven face. Schlesinger was sold, admitting, "I've only seen you in the context of "The Graduate," but you'll do quite well."

"Midnight Cowboy" premiered in theaters across the United States in May 1969. For his acting, Hoffman received his second Oscar nomination and the film won Best Picture. In 1994, the film was deemed "culturally, historically or aesthetically significant" by the Library of Congress and selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry. Biskind considers Hoffman's acting a major accomplishment:

Also in 1969, Hoffman co-starred with Mia Farrow in "John and Mary". He received a 1970 BAFTA Award as Best Actor, although the film received mixed reviews. He was also nominated for a Golden Globe Award as Best Actor.

This was followed by his role in "Little Big Man" (1970), where Jack Crabb, his character, ages from teenager to a 121-year-old man. The film was widely praised by critics, but was overlooked for an award except for a supporting nomination for Chief Dan George. Hoffman continued to appear in major films over the next few years. "Who Is Harry Kellerman and Why Is He Saying Those Terrible Things About Me?" (1971), "Straw Dogs" (also 1971), and "Papillon" (1973).

Hoffman next starred in "Lenny" (1974), for which he was again nominated for Best Actor. "Lenny" was based on the life of stand-up comedian Lenny Bruce, who died at age 40, and was known for his open, free-style and critical form of comedy which integrated politics, religion, sex, and vulgarity. Expectations were high that Hoffman would win an Oscar for his portrayal, especially after his similar role in "Midnight Cowboy." Film critic Katharine Lowry speculates that director Bob Fosse "never gave him a chance" to go far enough into developing the character. "We never understand what, besides the drugs he injected, made him tick like a time bomb," she says.

However, notes author Paul Gardner, "directing "Lenny", his most ambitious project, exhausted Fosse emotionally and physically. It turned his life inside out," with shooting days often lasting 10 to 12 hours:"
Hoffman initially turned the part down: "I didn't think the script was strong enough and I wasn't sure I was the one to play the role." While considering the part, he read Lenny Bruce's autobiography and looked at films with Bruce performing stand-up to live audiences. "I began to feel an affinity with him, a realization that there was a lot of Lenny Bruce in me. My wife felt it too." "I realized that I'd have to make use of my own spontaneity because he was so spontaneous. And I admired his guts. . . . That intimacy is what an actor tries to get. . . . It occurred to me that if I had known him, I would have wanted us to be friends…and he was a provocateur, and I love to provoke." Movie critic Judith Crist gave Hoffman credit for the ultimate success of the film:

"Lenny" was nominated for six Academy Awards, including Best Picture, Best Director, Best Actor, Best Actress, Best Adapted Screenplay, and Best Cinematography.

"All the President's Men" (1976) was made less than two years after the Watergate scandal, and starred Hoffman and Robert Redford as the real-life journalists, Carl Bernstein and Bob Woodward, respectively. Based on actual events, Hoffman and Redford play "Washington Post" reporters who uncover a break-in at the Watergate Hotel and end up investigating a political scandal that reaches all the way to the presidency. The film, as earlier ones, had Hoffman take on a dramatically different character than his previous one (as Lenny Bruce). Author James Morrison compares the two roles: "As Lenny Bruce in "Lenny" (1974), Hoffman plays a martyr to the cause of establishment oppression, while in "All the President's Men", he plays a reporter exposing presidential malfeasance."

Vincent Canby of "The New York Times" described the film as "a spellbinding detective story". "The strength of the movie", he added, was "the virtually day-to-day record of the way Bernstein and Woodward conducted their investigations." The characters portrayed by Hoffman and Redford shared the rank of No. 27 Hero on AFI's 100 Years... 100 Heroes and Villains list, while "Entertainment Weekly" ranked "All the President's Men" as one of the 25 "Powerful Political Thrillers".

Hoffman next starred in "Marathon Man" (1976), a film based on William Goldman's novel of the same name, opposite Laurence Olivier and Roy Scheider. Its director, John Schlesinger also directed Hoffman in "Midnight Cowboy" in 1969. Described as "Schlesinger's thriller," by author Gene D. Phillips, Hoffman plays the hero, Babe Levy, a part-time long-distance runner and graduate student, who suddenly finds himself being pursued by a fugitive Nazi. To put himself in the mindset of someone under severe emotional distress, rather than simply acting, Hoffman did not sleep for days at a time and let his body become disheveled and unhealthy.

Goldman describes his inspiration for the novel: "What if someone close to you was something totally different from what you thought? In the story, Hoffman thinks his brother (Roy Scheider) is a businessman where the reality is that the man is a spy, who has been involved with the Nazi, Szell." However, Hoffman remembers a serious disagreement he had with Goldman, who also wrote the screenplay, about how the story ends:

Hoffman's next roles were less successful. He opted out of directing "Straight Time" (1978), but starred as a thief. His next film, Michael Apted's "Agatha" (1979), was with Vanessa Redgrave as Agatha Christie.

Hoffman next starred in "Kramer vs. Kramer" (1979) co-starring Meryl Streep and directed by Robert Benton. The film tells the story of a married couple's divorce and its impact on everyone involved, including the couple's young son. Hoffman won his first Academy Award, and the film also received the Best Picture honor, plus the awards for Best Supporting Actress (Streep) and Best Director.

The film required Hoffman to change his attitude, from being a "desensitized advertising art director" into becoming a "responsive and concerned daddy" after his wife (Streep) walks out on him and their six-year-old son, Billy. Hoffman, during the making of the movie, was also going through his own divorce after a ten-year first marriage. Hoffman has said, "Giving myself permission not only to be present but to be a father was a kind of epiphany for me at that time, that I could get to through my work. . . . I got closer to being a father by playing a father. That's very painful to say." The role also reminded him of his own love of children in general:

Benton's directing has been praised by Hoffman, who credits him for inspiring the emotional level supporting many scenes: "Perfect directors make you emotional. On "Kramer vs. Kramer", Robert Benton made me emotional. He was pulling so hard for me. When I didn't think I could do a scene again I'd say, "I can't give it to you, I haven't got it." Then he'd just get this look on his face and roll the camera and I'd say, "Okay, this is yours." That's what he made you want to do for him—to give him one."

In "Tootsie" (1982), Hoffman portrays Michael Dorsey, a struggling actor who finds himself dressing up as a woman to land a role on a soap opera. His co-star was Jessica Lange. "Tootsie" earned ten Academy Award nominations, including Hoffman's fifth nomination.

Under direction by Sydney Pollack, Hoffman's role demanded "a steady bombardment of opposites—edgy then funny, romantic then realistic, soft then quivering." To film critic David Denby, Hoffman's character "embodies vulnerability and drive in perfect proportion. He has the knack of making everything he does seem perilous, and so audiences feel protective of him and root for him." Hoffman's acting was made more difficult than necessary, however, as he was not given the rehearsal time Pollack promised:
Fellow actor Gary Oldman reported that, during a telephone conversation with Hoffman, the latter recalled having "said some stuff... to someone who was very powerful" that ensured he was unable to find work in Hollywood for some time following "Tootsie". In 1983, Hoffman became a Major Donor for The Mirror Theater Ltd, alongside Paul Newman and Al Pacino, matching a grant from Laurance Rockefeller The men were inspired to invest by their connection with Lee Strasberg, as Lee's then daughter-in-law Sabra Jones was the Founder and Producing Artistic Director of The Mirror.

In 1984, Hoffman starred as Willy Loman in the Broadway revival of Arthur Miller's play, "Death of a Salesman" He reprised his role in a TV movie of the same name, for which he won the 1985 Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actor along with a Golden Globe.

Hoffman first read the play at age 16, but today considers the story much like his own: "It was a blueprint of my family. I was the loser, the flunky, and my brother, a high-school varsity football player, was Biff." Author Marie Brenner notes that Hoffman "has been obsessed with the play" throughout his career: "For years he has wanted to be Willy Loman; when he discovered that Arthur Miller was his neighbor in Connecticut, they began to talk about it in earnest." For Hoffman, the story also left a deep emotional impact from the time he first read it:

Hoffman rehearsed for three weeks with the play's original star, Lee J. Cobb, and remembers seeing his stage performance: "I'll never forget that period in my life. It was so vivid, so intense, watching Lee J. Cobb and his sixteen-inch guns as Willy. God, how I think about what I saw on that stage!" Brenner adds that Hoffman "has been training like a boxer for the role that so exhausted Cobb he had to be replaced after four months." The original play was directed by Elia Kazan, who Hoffman considers "the perfect director, the best there ever was. . . . God, I would have done "anything" to have worked with Kazan."

Hoffman's worst film failure was Elaine May's "Ishtar" (1987), co-starring Warren Beatty, who also produced it. Hoffman and Beatty play two down-and-out singer-songwriters who travel to Morocco for a nightclub gig and get caught up in foreign intrigue. Much of the movie was filmed in Africa. The film faced severe production problems, mostly related to its $55 million cost, and received overwhelmingly negative reviews. However, Hoffman and Beatty liked the film's final cut and tried to defend it. Hoffman and Beatty were unaffected by the flop, and "Ishtar" became a cult film. Quentin Tarantino, for one, has called it one of his favorite movies, partly due to the humorous lyrics of the songs written by Paul Williams. Hoffman describes why he loves the film:

Next came director Barry Levinson's "Rain Man" (1988), where Hoffman starred as an autistic savant, opposite Tom Cruise. Levinson, Hoffman and Cruise worked for two years on the film, and Hoffman's performance gained him his second Academy Award. Behind Hoffman's motivation for doing the film, he has said, "Deep inside, "Rain Man" is about how autistic we all are." In preparation for the part, Hoffman spent two years befriending autistic people, which included taking them bowling and to fast food restaurants. "It fed my obsession," he has stated.

Hoffman worked at the New York Psychiatric Institute, affiliated with Columbia University, when he was 21. "It was a great experience for me," he said. "All my life I had wanted to get inside a prison or a mental hospital. . . . I wanted to get inside where behavior, human behavior, was so exposed. All the things the rest of us were feeling and stopping up were coming out of these people." He used that experience to help him develop the character of Raymond Babbitt, a high-functioning autistic savant, yet a person who critic David Denby described as "a strangely shuttered genius." Hoffman created certain character traits for Raymond. Denby noted: "Hoffman, looking suddenly older and smaller, has developed a small shuffling walk for Raymond, with shoulder bent. His eyes don't make contact with anyone else's, and he flattens his voice to a dry nasal bark."

"Rain Man" won four Academy Awards, including Best Picture, Best Actor for Hoffman, and Best Director for Barry Levinson. Having worked closely with Hoffman for two years on filming, Levinson offered some opinions about his skill as an actor:

After "Rain Man", Hoffman appeared with Sean Connery and Matthew Broderick in "Family Business" (1989), directed by Sidney Lumet. The story centers on the estrangement between Vito (Hoffman), a middle-aged man trying to succeed in a legitimate business, and his "hopelessly corrupt but charming father," Jesse (Connery). Critics were mostly not impressed with the story, although the individual performances were praised, especially Connery's.

Because of their different acting styles and nationalities, some industry writers thought Connery and Hoffman might not work well together as close family members. "To the surprise of many," note Connery biographers Lee Pfeiffer and Lisa Philip, "the two superstars developed an immediate rapport and chemistry that translates onto the screen." And Lumet remembered: "Sean is extremely disciplined and Dustin is very improvisational, all over the place with his lines. I didn't know where it would end up, but Sean met Dustin improvisation for improvisation, and a great deal of richness and humor came out of it."

In 1991, Hoffman voiced substitute teacher Mr. Bergstrom in "The Simpsons" episode "Lisa's Substitute", under the pseudonym Sam Etic. As a reference to this episode, during the episode featuring the Itchy & Scratchy movie, Lisa claims that Dustin Hoffman had a cameo in that movie but didn't use his real name.

Throughout the 1990s, Hoffman appeared in many large, studio films, such as "Dick Tracy" (1990) (where his "Ishtar" co-star Beatty plays the titular character), "Hero" (1992) and "Billy Bathgate" (1991) co-starring with Nicole Kidman who was nominated for a Golden Globe). Hoffman also played the title role of Captain Hook in Steven Spielberg's "Hook" (also 1991), earning a Golden Globe nomination, and the narrator in Dr. Seuss Video Classics: "Horton Hears a Who!" (also 1992); in "Hook", Hoffman's costume was so heavy that he had to wear an air-conditioned suit under it.

Hoffman played the lead role in "Outbreak" (1995), alongside Rene Russo, Kevin Spacey, Morgan Freeman, Cuba Gooding Jr. and Donald Sutherland. In the film, Hoffman is a medical doctor who uncovers a newly discovered Ebola-like virus which came to the U.S. from Africa in an infected monkey. Hoffman races to stop the virus's spread and find a vaccine before it becomes a worldwide pandemic with no cure. It was one of the films that was produced by his production banner, Punch Productions.

The movie is described by critic Roger Ebert as "one of the great scare stories of our time, the notion that deep in the uncharted rain forests, deadly diseases are lurking, and if they ever escape their jungle homes and enter the human bloodstream, there will be a new plague the likes of which we have never seen." Critic David Denby credits Hoffman with giving the movie much of its thriller-like quality:
Following that, he appeared in the 1996 revenge drama/legal thriller "Sleepers" (1996) with Robert De Niro, Brad Pitt, Jason Patric, and Kevin Bacon.

In the mid-1990s, Hoffman starred in—and was deeply involved in the production of—David Mamet's "American Buffalo" (also 1996), and an early effort of film editor Kate Sanford. In 1997, Hoffman starred opposite John Travolta in the Costa Gavras film "Mad City".

Hoffman gained his seventh Academy Award nomination for his performance in "Wag The Dog" (1997), in a role that allowed Hoffman the chance to work with both Robert De Niro and Denis Leary. The movie is a black comedy film produced and directed by Barry Levinson, who also directed Hoffman in "Rain Man" in 1988.

The story takes place a few days before a presidential election, where a Washington, D.C. spin doctor (De Niro) distracts the electorate from a sex scandal by hiring a Hollywood film producer (Hoffman) to construct a fake war with Albania. Hoffman, as a caricature of real life producer Robert Evans, according to some, "gives the kind of wonderfully funny performance that is liable to win prizes, especially since its mixture of affection and murderous parody is so precise. Stanley (Hoffman) conducts business meetings in tennis clothes or in robe and slippers," notes critic Janet Maslin.

He next appeared in another Barry Levinson film, the science fiction psychological thriller, "Sphere" (1998), opposite Sharon Stone.

In 1999, Hoffman received the AFI Life Achievement Award and recalls the emotional impact that receiving the award had on him:

Hoffman next appeared in "Moonlight Mile" (2002), followed by "Confidence" (2003) opposite Edward Burns, Andy García and Rachel Weisz. Hoffman finally had a chance to work with Gene Hackman in Gary Fleder's "Runaway Jury" (also 2003), an adaptation of John Grisham's bestselling novel.

Hoffman played theater owner Charles Frohman in the J. M. Barrie historical fantasia "Finding Neverland" (2004), costarring Johnny Depp and Kate Winslet. In director David O. Russell's "I Heart Huckabees" (also 2004), Hoffman appeared opposite Lily Tomlin as an existential detective team member.

Seven years after his nomination for "Wag the Dog", Hoffman got another opportunity to perform again with Robert De Niro, co-starring with Barbra Streisand and Ben Stiller in the 2004 comedy "Meet the Fockers", a sequel to "Meet the Parents" (2000). Hoffman won the 2005 MTV Movie Award for Best Comedic Performance. In 2005, he voiced a horse in "Racing Stripes", and appeared in cameo roles in Andy García's "The Lost City" and on the final episode of HBO sitcom "Curb Your Enthusiasm"s fifth season. Hoffman appeared in "Stranger than Fiction" (2006), played the perfumer Giuseppe Baldini in Tom Tykwer's film "" (also 2006), and had a cameo in the same year's "The Holiday".

In 2007, he was featured in an advertising campaign for Australian telecommunications company Telstra's Next G network, appeared in the 50 Cent video "Follow My Lead" as a psychiatrist, and played the title character in the family film "Mr. Magorium's Wonder Emporium". In 2008, although he was reluctant to perform in an animated feature film (Although he had previously performed voices in a version of "The Point!" and in an episode of "The Simpsons"), Hoffman had a prominent role as Shifu in the acclaimed film "Kung Fu Panda", which was praised in part for his comedic chemistry with Jack Black (whom he tutored in acting for an important scene) and his character's poignantly complex relationship with the story's villain. He later won the Annie Award for Voice Acting in an Animated Feature for "Kung Fu Panda" and has continued into the role in the franchise's subsequent filmed productions outside of the franchise's . He next voiced Roscuro in "The Tale of Despereaux".

As the title character in "Last Chance Harvey", Hoffman acted with co-star Emma Thompson in the story of two lonely people who tentatively forge a relationship over the course of three days. Director Joel Hopkins notes that Hoffman was a perfectionist and self-critical: "He often wanted to try things stripped down, because less is sometimes more. He worries about every little detail."

He appears in "Little Fockers", the critically panned yet financially successful 2010 sequel to "Meet the Fockers". However, his character plays a significantly smaller role than in the previous installment. In 2011, Hoffman reprised his role as Shifu in the commercially and critically successful animated film "Kung Fu Panda 2".

Hoffman starred in the HBO horse racing drama "Luck", as a man involved in bookmaking and casino operations. "Luck" was cancelled in March 2012 after three horses died on set. Hoffman also directed "Quartet", a BBC Films comedy starring Maggie Smith and Tom Courtenay.

In 2012, Hoffman's audiobook recording of Jerzy Kosinski's "Being There" was released at Audible.com. His performance was nominated for a 2013 Audie Award for Best Solo Narration.

In late 2017, seven women accused Hoffman of sexual misconduct or assault, including Meryl Streep, Anna Graham Hunter, Wendy Riss Gatsiounis, Cori Thomas, Melissa Kester, Kathryn Rossetter, and an anonymous woman. A woman who was a minor (17) at the time said Hoffman sexually harassed her and forced her to give him foot massages. Hoffman's daughter's friend who also was a minor at the time (16), alleged Hoffman exposed his penis to her in a hotel room then asked for a foot massage. One woman said Hoffman touched her naked breasts and inner thighs 6-8 times a week, against her will, during a specific microphone speaking part of a Broadway play that left her unable to stop him. She stated one performance he started putting his fingers inside her vagina during the same speaking part, and alleged another time he pulled her dress over her head, revealing her naked body to other cast members and causing her to miss her part and be reprimanded. She shared a picture of Hoffman grabbing her breast, which she says was against her will. Two other women accused him of separate incidents where he inserted his fingers inside their vaginas unexpectedly and without permission when they were near him while wearing a skirt. 

Hoffman released an apology to the 17-year-old intern who alleged harassment but denied wrongdoing, saying, "I have the utmost respect for women and feel terrible that anything I might have done could have put her in an uncomfortable situation," continuing, "I am sorry. It is not reflective of who I am." In December 2017, comedian John Oliver unexpectedly asked Hoffman about the allegations at a screening of "Wag the Dog". "It’s ‘not reflective of who I am’ — it’s that kind of response to this stuff that pisses me off,” Oliver said. “It is reflective of who you were. If you’ve given no evidence to show it didn’t [happen] then there was a period of time for a while when you were a creeper around women. It feels like a cop-out to say ‘It wasn’t me.’ Do you understand how that feels like a dismissal?" Hoffman said he felt blindsided by the line of questioning, remarking, "You’ve made the case better than anyone else can. I’m guilty. Because someone has alleged something, I’m guilty. You push a button. It’s all over the world. I’m a predator. I’m this and that and it’s not true." Hoffman has not publicly responded to the other six allegations. Comedian Chevy Chase, a long-time friend of Hoffman, publicly stated that he doesn't believe the allegations. "I knew him back then, it just didn’t really happen,” said Chase. “He was explaining to me what they were talking about. I’ve known him forever, so I’ve never known him to be that way… groping or whatever the hell that is.” Actor Liam Neeson was widely covered by the media in January 2018 for coming to Hoffman's defense, saying that forcibly touching a woman's breasts behind the scenes of a play every night was "childhood stuff," and "you do silly things and it becomes kind of superstitious; if you don't do it every night you think it's going to jinx the show." On February 12th, 2018 John Oliver commented on said incident: “It felt like he should’ve been aware that he was going to have to answer to this the next time he answered anything,” he continued. “I’m staggered if he honestly thought I wouldn’t bring it up. I don’t know how little he would have to think of me to think I wouldn’t bring that up. That’s pretty insulting. I have to believe that most people would have asked him about it,” Oliver said. “Then the only reason the conversation kept going was because his responses were pretty bad. I want to try to get him to a point of self-reflection, to try to get something out of the conversation at all, but that didn’t happen. I don’t think there was anything particularly remarkable about what I was asking. I think a lot of things were pretty dispiriting about how he was responding.”

Hoffman married Anne Byrne in May 1969. He adopted Karina (b. 1966), Byrne's child from a previous marriage, and with Byrne had daughter Jenna (born October 15, 1970). In 1970, Hoffman and Byrne were living in Greenwich Village in a building next door to a townhouse occupied by members of the Weathermen, when a bomb was accidentally detonated in the townhouse's basement, killing three people. In the 2002 documentary "The Weather Underground", Hoffman can be seen standing in the street during the aftermath of the explosion. The couple divorced in 1980.

He married businesswoman Lisa Gottsegen Hoffman in October 1980; they have four children – Jacob Edward (born March 20, 1981), Rebecca Lillian (b. March 17, 1983), Maxwell Geoffrey (born August 30, 1984), and Alexandra Lydia "Ali" (born October 27, 1987). Hoffman has two grandchildren. In an interview, he said that all of his children from his second marriage had bar or bat mitzvahs and that he is a more observant Jew now than when he was younger; he has also lamented that he is not fluent in Hebrew.

A political liberal, Hoffman has long supported the Democratic Party and Ralph Nader. In 1997, he was one of a number of Hollywood stars and executives to sign an open letter to then-German Chancellor Helmut Kohl protesting against the treatment of Scientologists in Germany, which was published as a newspaper advertisement in the "International Herald Tribune".

In 2009, he received the freedom of the Italian city Ascoli Piceno for being there during 1972 to shoot the movie "Alfredo, Alfredo" by Pietro Germi, where he played the role of Alfredo Sbisà.

Dustin Hoffman received Kennedy Center Honors in 2012, with the following commendation: "Dustin Hoffman's unyielding commitment to the wide variety of roles he plays has made him one of the most versatile and iconoclastic actors of this or any other generation".

Hoffman was successfully treated for cancer in 2013.



</doc>
<doc id="19903" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19903" title="Marlon Brando">
Marlon Brando

Marlon Brando Jr. (April 3, 1924 – July 1, 2004) was an American actor, film director, and activist. He is credited with bringing realism to film acting, helping to popularize the Stanislavski system of acting, studying with Stella Adler in the 1940s. Brando's Academy Award-winning performances include that of Terry Malloy in "On the Waterfront" (1954) and Don Vito Corleone in "The Godfather" (1972). Brando was an activist for many causes, notably the Civil Rights Movement and various Native American movements.

He initially gained acclaim and an Academy Award nomination for reprising the role of Stanley Kowalski in the 1951 film adaptation of Tennessee Williams' play "A Streetcar Named Desire", a role that he originated successfully on Broadway. He received further praise for his performance as Terry Malloy in "On the Waterfront", and his portrayal of the rebellious motorcycle gang leader Johnny Strabler in "The Wild One" proved to be a lasting image in popular culture. Brando received Academy Award nominations for playing Emiliano Zapata in "Viva Zapata!"; Mark Antony in Joseph L. Mankiewicz's 1953 film adaptation of Shakespeare's "Julius Caesar"; and Air Force Major Lloyd Gruver in "Sayonara" (1957), an adaption of James Michener's 1954 novel. Brando was included in a list of Top Ten Money Making Stars three times in the 1950s, coming in at number 10 in 1954, number 6 in 1955, and number 4 in 1958.

The 1960s proved to be a fallow decade for Brando. He directed and starred in the cult western film "One-Eyed Jacks", a critical and commercial flop, after which he delivered a series of box-office failures, beginning with the 1962 film adaptation of the novel "Mutiny on the Bounty". After 10 years, during which he did not appear in a successful film, he won his second Academy Award for playing Vito Corleone in Francis Ford Coppola's "The Godfather", a role critics consider among his greatest. "The Godfather" was then one of the most commercially successful films of all time. With that and his Oscar-nominated performance in "Last Tango in Paris", Brando re-established himself in the ranks of top box-office stars, placing sixth and tenth in the Money Making Stars poll in 1972 and 1973, respectively. Brando took a four-year hiatus before appearing in "The Missouri Breaks" (1976). After this, he was content with being a highly paid character actor in cameo roles, such as in "Superman" (1978) and "The Formula" (1980), before taking a nine-year break from motion pictures. According to the "Guinness Book of World Records", Brando was paid a record $3.7 million ($ million in inflation-adjusted dollars) and 11.75% of the gross profits for 13 days' work on "Superman". He finished out the 1970s with his controversial performance as Colonel Kurtz in another Coppola film, "Apocalypse Now", a box-office hit for which he was highly paid and which helped finance his career layoff during the 1980s.

Brando was ranked by the American Film Institute as the fourth-greatest movie star among male movie stars whose screen debuts occurred in or before 1950. He was one of only four professional actors, along with Charlie Chaplin, Ronald Reagan and Marilyn Monroe, named in 1999 by "Time" magazine as one of its . He died of respiratory failure on July 1, 2004, at age 80.

Brando was born on April 3, 1924, in Omaha, Nebraska, to Marlon Brando, Sr. (1895–1965), a pesticide and chemical feed manufacturer, and Dorothy Julia (née Pennebaker; 1897–1954). Brando had two older sisters, Jocelyn Brando (1919–2005) and Frances (1922–1994). His ancestry was German, Dutch, English, and Irish. His patrilineal immigrant ancestor, Johann Wilhelm Brandau, arrived in New York in the early 1700s from the Palatinate in Germany. Brando was raised a Christian Scientist.

His mother, known as Dodie, was unconventional for her time; she smoked, wore trousers and drove cars. An actress herself and even a theatre administrator, she helped Henry Fonda begin his acting career. However, she was an alcoholic and often had to be brought home from Chicago bars by her husband. In his autobiography, "Songs My Mother Taught Me", Brando expressed sadness when writing about his mother: "The anguish that her drinking produced was that she preferred getting drunk to caring for us." Dodie and Brando's father eventually joined Alcoholics Anonymous. Brando harbored far more enmity for his father, stating, "I was his namesake, but nothing I did ever pleased or even interested him. He enjoyed telling me I couldn't do anything right. He had a habit of telling me I would never amount to anything." Brando's parents moved to Evanston, Illinois, when his father's work took him to Chicago, but separated when Brando was 11 years old. His mother took the three children to Santa Ana, California, where they lived with her mother. In 1937, Brando's parents reconciled and moved together to Libertyville, Illinois, a small town north of Chicago. In 1939 and 1941, he worked as an usher at the town's only movie theatre, The Liberty.

Brando, whose childhood nickname was "Bud", was a mimic from his youth. He developed an ability to absorb the mannerisms of kids he played with and display them dramatically while staying in character. He was introduced to neighborhood boy Wally Cox and the two were unlikely closest friends until Cox's death in 1973. In the 2007 TCM biopic, "Brando: The Documentary", childhood friend George Englund recalls Brando's earliest acting as imitating the cows and horses on the family farm as a way to distract his mother from drinking. His sister Jocelyn was the first to pursue an acting career, going to study at the American Academy of Dramatic Arts in New York City. She appeared on Broadway, then films and television. Brando's sister Frances left college in California to study art in New York. Brando had been held back a year in school and was later expelled from Libertyville High School for riding his motorcycle through the corridors.

He was sent to Shattuck Military Academy, where his father had studied before him. Brando excelled at theatre and did well in the school. In his final year (1943), he was put on probation for being insubordinate to a visiting army colonel during maneuvers. He was confined to his room, but snuck into town and was caught. The faculty voted to expel him, though he was supported by the students, who thought expulsion was too harsh. He was invited back for the following year, but decided instead to drop out of high school. Brando worked as a ditch-digger as a summer job arranged by his father. He tried to enlist in the Army, but his induction physical revealed that a football injury he had sustained at Shattuck had left him with a trick knee. He was classified 4-F and not inducted.

Brando decided to follow his sisters to New York, studying at the American Theatre Wing Professional School, part of the Dramatic Workshop of the New School, with influential German director Erwin Piscator. In a 1988 documentary, "Marlon Brando: The Wild One", Brando's sister Jocelyn remembered, "He was in a school play and enjoyed it ... So he decided he would go to New York and study acting because that was the only thing he had enjoyed. That was when he was 18." In the A&E "Biography" episode on Brando, George Englund said Brando fell into acting in New York because "he was accepted there. He wasn't criticized. It was the first time in his life that he heard good things about himself."

Brando was an avid student and proponent of Stella Adler, from whom he learned the techniques of the Stanislavski system. This technique encouraged the actor to explore both internal and external aspects to fully realize the character being portrayed. Brando's remarkable insight and sense of realism were evident early on. Adler used to recount that when teaching Brando, she had instructed the class to act like chickens, and added that a nuclear bomb was about to fall on them. Most of the class clucked and ran around wildly, but Brando sat calmly and pretended to lay an egg. Asked by Adler why he had chosen to react this way, he said, "I'm a chicken—what do I know about bombs?" Despite being commonly regarded as a Method actor, Brando disagreed. He claimed to have abhorred Lee Strasberg's teachings:

Brando was the first to bring a natural approach to acting on film. According to Dustin Hoffman in his online Masterclass, Brando would often talk to camera men and fellow actors about their weekend even after the director would call action. Once Brando felt he could deliver the dialogue as natural as that conversation he would start the dialogue. In his 2015 documentary, "Listen To Me Marlon", he said before that actors were like breakfast cereals. He was calling them predictable. Critics would later say this was Brando being difficult, but actors who worked opposite would say it was just all part of his technique.

Brando used his Stanislavski System skills for his first summer stock roles in Sayville, New York, on Long Island. Brando established a pattern of erratic, insubordinate behavior in the few shows he had been in. His behavior had him kicked out of the cast of the New School's production in Sayville, but he was soon afterwards discovered in a locally produced play there. Then, in 1944, he made it to Broadway in the bittersweet drama "I Remember Mama", playing the son of Mady Christians. The Lunts wanted Brando to play the role of Alfred Lunt's son in "O Mistress Mine", and Lunt even coached him for his audition, but Brando's reading during the audition was so desultory that they couldn't hire him. New York Drama Critics voted him "Most Promising Young Actor" for his role as an anguished veteran in "Truckline Café", although the play was a commercial failure. In 1946, he appeared on Broadway as the young hero in the political drama "A Flag is Born", refusing to accept wages above the Actors' Equity rate. In that same year, Brando played the role of Marchbanks alongside Katharine Cornell in her production's revival of "Candida", one of her signature roles. Cornell also cast him as the Messenger in her production of Jean Anouilh's "Antigone" that same year. He was also offered the opportunity to portray one of the principal characters in the Broadway premiere of Eugene O'Neill's "The Iceman Cometh", but turned the part down after falling asleep while trying to read the massive script and pronouncing the play "ineptly written and poorly constructed".

In 1945, Brando's agent recommended he take a co-starring role in "The Eagle Has Two Heads" with Tallulah Bankhead, produced by Jack Wilson. Bankhead had turned down the role of Blanche Dubois in "A Streetcar Named Desire", which Williams had written for her, to tour the play for the 1946–1947 season. Bankhead recognized Brando's potential, despite her disdain (which most Broadway veterans shared) for method acting, and agreed to hire him even though he auditioned poorly. The two clashed greatly during the pre-Broadway tour, with Bankhead reminding Brando of his mother, being her age and also having a drinking problem. Wilson was largely tolerant of Brando's behavior, but he reached his limit when Brando mumbled through a dress rehearsal shortly before the November 28, 1946, opening. "I don't care what your grandmother did," Wilson exclaimed, "and that Method stuff, I want to know what you're going to do!" Brando in turn raised his voice, and acted with great power and passion. "It was marvelous," a cast member recalled. "Everybody hugged him and kissed him. He came ambling offstage and said to me, 'They don't think you can act unless you can yell.'"

Critics were not as kind, however. A review of Brando's performance in the opening assessed that Brando was "still building his character, but at present fails to impress." One Boston critic remarked of Brando's prolonged death scene, "Brando looked like a car in midtown Manhattan searching for a parking space." He received better reviews at subsequent tour stops, but what his colleagues recalled was only occasional indications of the talent he would later demonstrate. "There were a few times when he was really magnificent," Bankhead admitted to an interviewer in 1962. "He was a great young actor when he wanted to be, but most of the time I couldn't even hear him on the stage."

Brando displayed his apathy for the production by demonstrating some shocking onstage manners. He "tried everything in the world to ruin it for her," Bankhead's stage manager claimed. "He nearly drove her crazy: scratching his crotch, picking his nose, doing anything." After several weeks on the road, they reached Boston, by which time Bankhead was ready to dismiss him. This proved to be one of the greatest blessings of his career, as it freed him up to play the role of Stanley Kowalski in Tennessee Williams's 1947 play "A Streetcar Named Desire", directed by Elia Kazan. Bankhead had recommended him to Williams for the role of Stanley, thinking he was perfect for the part.

Pierpont writes that John Garfield was first choice for the role, but "made impossible demands." It was Kazan's decision to fall back on the far less experienced (and technically too young for the role) Brando. In a letter dated August 29, 1947, Williams confided to his agent Audrey Wood: "It had not occurred to me before what an excellent value would come through casting a very young actor in this part. It humanizes the character of Stanley in that it becomes the brutality and callousness of youth rather than a vicious old man ... A new value came out of Brando's reading which was by far the best reading I have ever heard." Brando based his portrayal of Kowalski on the boxer Rocky Graziano, whom he had studied at a local gymnasium. Graziano did not know who Brando was, but attended the production with tickets provided by the young man. He said, "The curtain went up and on the stage is that son of a bitch from the gym, and he's playing me."

In 1947, Brando performed a screen test for an early Warner Brothers script for the novel "Rebel Without a Cause" (1944), which bore no relation to the film eventually produced in 1955. The screen test is included as an extra in the 2006 DVD release of "A Streetcar Named Desire".

Brando's first screen role was a bitter paraplegic veteran in "The Men" (1950). He spent a month in bed at the Birmingham Army Hospital in Van Nuys to prepare for the role. "The New York Times" reviewer Bosley Crowther wrote that Brando as Ken "is so vividly real, dynamic and sensitive that his illusion is complete" and noted, "Out of stiff and frozen silences he can lash into a passionate rage with the tearful and flailing frenzy of a taut cable suddenly cut."

By Brando's own account, it may have been because of this film that his draft status was changed from 4-F to 1-A. He had had surgery on his trick knee, and it was no longer physically debilitating enough to incur exclusion from the draft. When Brando reported to the induction center, he answered a questionnaire by saying his race was "human", his color was "Seasonal-oyster white to beige", and he told an Army doctor that he was psychoneurotic. When the draft board referred him to a psychiatrist, Brando explained that he had been expelled from military school and had severe problems with authority. Coincidentally, the psychiatrist knew a doctor friend of Brando. Brando avoided military service during the Korean War.

Early in his career, Brando began using cue cards instead of memorizing his lines. Despite the objections of several of the film directors he worked with, Brando felt that this helped bring realism and spontaneity to his performances. He felt otherwise he would appear to be reciting a writer's speech. In the TV documentary "The Making of Superman: The Movie", Brando explained: 

However, some thought Brando used the cards out of laziness or an inability to memorize his lines. Once on "The Godfather" set, Brando was asked why he wanted his lines printed out. He responded, "Because I can read them that way."

Brando brought his performance as Stanley Kowalski to the screen in Tennessee William's "A Streetcar Named Desire" (1951). The role is regarded as one of Brando's greatest. The reception of Brando's performance was so positive that Brando quickly became a male sex symbol in Hollywood. The role earned him his first Academy Award nomination in the Best Actor category.
He was also nominated the next year for "Viva Zapata!" (1952), a fictionalized account of the life of Mexican revolutionary Emiliano Zapata. It recounted his peasant upbringing, his rise to power in the early 20th century, and death. The film was directed by Elia Kazan and co-starred Anthony Quinn. In the biopic "Marlon Brando: The Wild One", Sam Shaw says, "Secretly, before the picture started, he went to Mexico to the very town where Zapata lived and was born in and it was there that he studied the speech patterns of people, their behavior, movement." Most critics focused on the actor rather than the film, with "Time" and "Newsweek" publishing rave reviews.

Years later, in his autobiography, Brando remarked: "Tony Quinn, whom I admired professionally and liked personally, played my brother, but he was extremely cold to me while we shot that picture. During our scenes together, I sensed a bitterness toward me, and if I suggested a drink after work, he either turned me down or else was sullen and said little. Only years later did I learn why." Brando related that, to create on-screen tension between the two, "Gadg" (Kazan) had told Quinn—who had taken over the role of Stanley Kowalski on Broadway after Brando had finished—that Brando had been unimpressed with his work. After achieving the desired effect, Kazan never told Quinn that he had misled him. It was only many years later, after comparing notes, that Brando and Quinn realized the deception.

Brando's next film, "Julius Caesar" (1953), received highly favorable reviews. Brando portrayed Mark Antony. While most acknowledged Brando's talent, some critics felt Brando's "mumbling" and other idiosyncrasies betrayed a lack of acting fundamentals and, when his casting was announced, many remained dubious about his prospects for success. Directed by Joseph L. Mankiewicz and co-starring British stage actor John Gielgud, Brando delivered an impressive performance, especially during Antony's noted "Friends, Romans, countrymen ..." speech. Gielgud was so impressed that he offered Brando a full season at the Hammersmith Theatre, an offer he declined. In his biography on the actor, Stefan Kanfer writes, "Marlon's autobiography devotes one line to his work on that film: Among all those British professionals, 'for me to walk onto a movie set and play Mark Anthony was asinine'—yet another example of his persistent self-denigration, and wholly incorrect." Kanfer adds that after a screening of the film, director John Huston commented, "Christ! It was like a furnace door opening—the heat came off the screen. I don't know another actor who could do that." During the filming of "Julius Caesar", Brando learned that Elia Kazan had cooperated with congressional investigators, naming a whole string of "subversives" to the House Committee on Un-American Activities. By all accounts, Brando was upset by his mentor's decision, but he worked with him again in "On The Waterfront". "None of us is perfect," he later wrote in his memoir, "and I think that Gadg has done injury to others, but mostly to himself."

In 1953, Brando also starred in "The Wild One", riding his own Triumph Thunderbird 6T motorcycle. Triumph's importers were ambivalent at the exposure, as the subject matter was rowdy motorcycle gangs taking over a small town. The film was criticized for its perceived gratuitous violence at the time, with "Time" stating, "The effect of the movie is not to throw light on the public problem, but to shoot adrenaline through the moviegoer's veins." Brando allegedly did not see eye to eye with the Hungarian director László Benedek and did not get on with costar Lee Marvin.

To Brando's expressed puzzlement, the movie inspired teen rebellion and made him a role model to the nascent rock-and-roll generation and future stars such as James Dean and Elvis Presley. After the movie's release, the sales of leather jackets and blue jeans skyrocketed. Reflecting on the movie in his autobiography, Brando concluded that it had not aged very well but said:

In 1954, Brando starred in "On the Waterfront", a crime drama film about union violence and corruption among longshoremen. The film was directed by Elia Kazan and written by Budd Schulberg; it also stars Karl Malden, Lee J. Cobb, Rod Steiger and, in her film debut, Eva Marie Saint. When initially offered the role, Brando—still stung by Kazan's testimony to HUAC—demurred and the part of Terry Malloy nearly went to Frank Sinatra. According to biographer Stefan Kanfer, the director believed that Sinatra, who grew up in Hoboken, would work as Malloy, but eventually producer Sam Spiegel wooed Brando to the part, signing him for $100,000. "Kazan made no protest because, he subsequently confessed, 'I always preferred Brando to anybody.'"
Brando won the Oscar for his role as Irish-American stevedore Terry Malloy in "On the Waterfront". His performance, spurred on by his rapport with Eva Marie Saint and Kazan's direction, was praised as a "tour de force". For the famous "I coulda been a contender" scene, he convinced Kazan that the scripted scene was unrealistic. Schulberg's script had Brando acting the entire scene with his character being held at gunpoint by his brother Charlie, played by Rod Steiger. Brando insisted on gently pushing away the gun, saying that Terry would never believe that his brother would pull the trigger and doubting that he could continue his speech while fearing a gun on him. Kazan let Brando improvise and later expressed deep admiration for Brando's instinctive understanding, saying:
Upon its release, "On the Waterfront" received glowing reviews from critics and was a commercial success, earning an estimated $4.2 million in rentals at the North American box office in 1954. In his July 29, 1954, review, "The New York Times" critic A. H. Weiler praised the film, calling it "an uncommonly powerful, exciting, and imaginative use of the screen by gifted professionals." Film critic Roger Ebert lauded the film, stating that Brando and Kazan changed acting in American films forever and added it to his "Great Movies" list. In his autobiography, Brando was typically dismissive of his performance: "On the day Gadg showed me the complete picture, I was so depressed by my performance I got up and left the screening room ... I thought I was a huge failure." After Brando won the Academy Award for Best Actor, the statue was stolen. Much later, it turned up at a London auction house, which contacted the actor and informed him of its whereabouts.

Brando would later say in his 2015 documentary, Listen to me Marlon, that he felt the part in "On the Waterfront" that won him an Oscar was to him personally, not good, and that he knew he had done better acting. In the behind the scenes of "On the Waterfront" film experts and critics would say he would change lines because he didn't like the script, and that he'd let the director know by having regular conversations. However, this was a way for Brando to prepare before a scene by warming up before starting the dialogue, in order to deliver it as natural as possible. Brando often saw a shrink, and reportedly wasn't there for some of the shooting of the scene when the close up was on the opposite actor. This is why this part of his technique is recognized mistakenly as him being difficult, and not a part of his approach.

Following "On the Waterfront", Brando remained a top box office draw, but critics increasingly felt his performances were half-hearted, lacking the intensity and commitment found in his earlier work, especially in his work with Kazan. He portrayed Napoleon in the 1954 film "Désirée". According to co-star Jean Simmons, Brando's contract forced him to star in the movie. He put little effort into the role, claiming he didn't like the script, and later dismissed the entire movie as "superficial and dismal". Brando was especially contemptuous of director Henry Koster.

Brando and Simmons were paired together again in the film adaptation of the musical "Guys and Dolls" (1955). "Guys and Dolls" would be Brando's first and last musical role. "Time" found the picture "false to the original in its feeling", remarking that Brando "sings in a faraway tenor that sometimes tends to be flat." Appearing in Edward Murrow's "Person to Person" interview in early 1955, he admitted to having problems with his singing voice, which he called "pretty terrible." In the 1965 documentary "Meet Marlon Brando", he revealed that the final product heard in the movie was a result of countless singing takes being cut into one and later joked, "I couldn't hit a note with a baseball bat; some notes I missed by extraordinary margins ... They sewed my words together on one song so tightly that when I mouthed it in front of the camera, I nearly asphyxiated myself". Relations between Brando and costar Frank Sinatra were also frosty, with Stefan Kanfer observing, "The two men were diametrical opposites: Marlon required multiple takes; Frank detested repeating himself." Upon their first meeting Sinatra reportedly scoffed, "Don't give me any of that Actors Studio shit." Brando later famously quipped, "Frank is the kind of guy, when he dies, he's going to heaven and give God a hard time for making him bald." Frank Sinatra famously called Brando "the world's most overrated actor", and referred to him as "mumbles". The film was commercially though not critically successful, costing $5.5 million to make and grossing $13 million.

Brando played Sakini, a Japanese interpreter for the U.S. Army in postwar Japan, in "The Teahouse of the August Moon" (1956). Pauline Kael was not particularly impressed by the movie, but noted "Marlon Brando starved himself to play the pixie interpreter Sakini, and he looks as if he's enjoying the stunt—talking with a mad accent, grinning boyishly, bending forward, and doing tricky movements with his legs. He's harmlessly genial (and he is certainly missed when he's offscreen), though the fey, roguish role doesn't allow him to do what he's great at and it's possible that he's less effective in it than a lesser actor might have been." In "Sayonara" (1957) he appeared as a United States Air Force officer. "Newsweek" found the film a "dull tale of the meeting of the twain", but it was nevertheless a box office success. According to Stefan Kanfer's biography of the actor, Brando's manager Jay Kanter negotiated a profitable contract with ten percent of the gross going to Brando, which put him in the millionaire category. The movie was controversial due to openly discussing interracial marriage, but proved a great success, earning 10 Academy Award nominations, with Brando being nominated for Best Actor. The film went on to win four Academy Awards. "Teahouse" and "Sayonara" were the first in a string of films Brando would strive to make over the next decade which contained socially relevant messages, and he formed a partnership with Paramount to establish his own production company called Pennebaker, its declared purpose to develop films that contained "social value that would improve the world." The name was a tribute in honor of his mother, who had died in 1954. By all accounts, Brando was devastated by her death, with biographer Peter Manso telling A&E's "Biography", "She was the one who could give him approval like no one else could and, after his mother died, it seems that Marlon stops caring." Brando appointed his father to run Pennebaker. In the same A&E special, George Englund claims that Brando gave his father the job because "it gave Marlon a chance to take shots at him, to demean and diminish him".

In 1958, Brando appeared in "The Young Lions", dyeing his hair blonde and assuming a German accent for the role, which he later admitted was not convincing. The film is based on the novel by Irwin Shaw, and Brando's portrayal of the character Christian Diestl was controversial for its time. He later wrote, "The original script closely followed the book, in which Shaw painted all Germans as evil caricatures, especially Christian, whom he portrayed as a symbol of everything that was bad about Nazism; he was mean, nasty, vicious, a cliché of evil ... I thought the story should demonstrate that there are no inherently 'bad' people in the world, but they can easily be misled." Shaw and Brando even appeared together for a televised interview with CBS correspondent David Schoenbrun and, during a bombastic exchange, Shaw charged that, like most actors, Brando was incapable of playing flat-out villainy; Brando responded by stating "Nobody creates a character but an actor. I play the role; now he exists. He is my creation." "The Young Lions" also features Brando's only appearance in a film with friend and rival Montgomery Clift (although they shared no scenes together). Brando closed out the decade by appearing in "The Fugitive Kind" (1960) opposite Anna Magnani. The film was based on another play by Tennessee Williams but was hardly the success "A Streetcar Named Desire" had been, with the "Los Angeles Times" labeling Williams's personae "psychologically sick or just plain ugly" and "The New Yorker" calling it a "cornpone melodrama".

In 1961, Brando made his directorial debut in the western "One-Eyed Jacks". The picture was originally directed by Stanley Kubrick, but he was fired early in the production. Paramount then made Brando the director. Brando portrays the lead character Rio, and Karl Malden plays his partner "Dad" Longworth. The supporting cast features Katy Jurado, Ben Johnson, and Slim Pickens. Brando's penchant for multiple retakes and character exploration as an actor carried over into his directing, however, and the film soon went over budget; Paramount expected the film to take three months to complete but shooting stretched to six and the cost doubled to more than six million dollars. Brando's inexperience as an editor also delayed postproduction and Paramount eventually took control of the film. Brando later wrote, "Paramount said it didn't like my version of the story; I'd had everyone lie except Karl Malden. The studio cut the movie to pieces and made him a liar, too. By then, I was bored with the whole project and walked away from it." "One-Eyed Jacks" was poorly reviewed by critics. While the film did solid business, it ran so over budget that it lost money.

Brando's revulsion with the film industry reportedly boiled over on the set of his next film, Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer's remake of "Mutiny on the Bounty", which was filmed in Tahiti. The actor was accused of deliberately sabotaging nearly every aspect of the production. On June 16, 1962, "The Saturday Evening Post" ran an article by Bill Davidson with the headline "Six million dollars down the drain: the mutiny of Marlon Brando". "Mutiny" director Lewis Milestone claimed that the executives "deserve what they get when they give a ham actor, a petulant child, complete control over an expensive picture." " Mutiny on the Bounty" nearly capsized MGM and, while the project had indeed been hampered with delays other than Brando's behavior, the accusations would dog the actor for years as studios began to fear Brando's difficult reputation. Critics also began taking note of his fluctuating weight.

Distracted by his personal life and becoming disillusioned with his career, Brando began to view acting as a means to a financial end. Critics protested when he started accepting roles in films many perceived as being beneath his talent, or criticized him for failing to live up to the better roles. Previously only signing short term deals with movie studios, in 1961 Brando uncharacteristically signed a five-picture deal with Universal Studios that would haunt him for the rest of the decade. "The Ugly American" (1963) was the first of these films. Based on the 1958 novel of the same name that Pennebaker had optioned, the movie, which featured Brando's sister Jocelyn, was rated fairly positively but died at the box office. Brando was nominated for a Golden Globe for his performance. All of Brando's other Universal films during this period, including "Bedtime Story" (1964), "The Appaloosa" (1966), "A Countess from Hong Kong" (1967) and "The Night of the Following Day" (1969), were also critical and commercial flops. "Countess" in particular was a disappointment for Brando, who had looked forward to working with one of his heroes, director Charlie Chaplin. The experience turned out to be an unhappy one; Brando was horrified at Chaplin's didactic style of direction and his authoritarian approach. Brando had also appeared in the spy thriller "Morituri" in 1965; that, too, failed to attract an audience.

Brando acknowledged his professional decline, writing later, "Some of the films I made during the sixties were successful; some weren't. Some, like "The Night of the Following Day", I made only for the money; others, like "Candy", I did because a friend asked me to and I didn't want to turn him down ... In some ways I think of my middle age as the Fuck You Years." "Candy" was especially appalling for many; a 1968 sex farce film directed by Christian Marquand and based on the 1958 novel by Terry Southern, the movie satirizes pornographic stories through the adventures of its naive heroine, Candy, played by Ewa Aulin. It is generally regarded as the nadir of Brando's career. "The Washington Post" observed: "Brando's self-indulgence over a dozen years is costing him and his public his talents." In the March 1966 issue of "The Atlantic", Pauline Kael wrote that in his rebellious days, Brando "was antisocial because he knew society was crap; he was a hero to youth because he was strong enough not to take the crap", but now Brando and others like him had become "buffoons, shamelessly, pathetically mocking their public reputations." In an earlier review of "The Appaloosa" in 1966, Kael wrote that the actor was "trapped in another dog of a movie ... Not for the first time, Mr. Brando gives us a heavy-lidded, adenoidally openmouthed caricature of the inarticulate, stalwart loner." Although he feigned indifference, Brando was hurt by the critical mauling, admitting in the 2015 film "Listen to Me Marlon", "They can hit you every day and you have no way of fighting back. I was very convincing in my pose of indifference, but I was very sensitive and it hurt a lot."

While Brando had lost much of his critical and commercial appeal in the 1960s, he still gave some memorable performances. Brando portrayed a repressed gay army officer in "Reflections in a Golden Eye", directed by John Huston and costarring Elizabeth Taylor. The role turned out as one of his most acclaimed in years, with Stanley Crouch marveling, "Brando's main achievement was to portray the taciturn but stoic gloom of those pulverized by circumstances." The film overall received mixed reviews. Another notable film was "The Chase" (1966), which paired the actor with Arthur Penn, Robert Duvall, Jane Fonda and Robert Redford. The film deals with themes of racism, sexual revolution, small-town corruption, and vigilantism. The film was received mostly positively.

Brando cited "Burn!" (1969) as his personal favorite of the films he had made, writing in his autobiography, "I think I did some of the best acting I've ever done in that picture, but few people came to see it." Brando dedicated a full chapter to the film in his memoir, stating that the director, Gillo Pontecorvo, was the best director he had ever worked with next to Kazan and Bernardo Bertolucci. Brando also detailed his clashes with Pontecorvo on the set and how "we nearly killed each other." Loosely based on events in the history of Guadeloupe, the film got a hostile reception from critics. In 1971, Michael Winner directed him in the British horror film "The Nightcomers" with Stephanie Beacham, Thora Hird, Harry Andrews and Anna Palk. It is a prequel to "The Turn of the Screw", which later became the 1961 film "The Innocents". Brando's performance earned him a nomination for a Best Actor BAFTA, but the film bombed at the box office.

During the 1970s, Brando was considered "unbankable". Critics were becoming increasingly dismissive of his work and he had not appeared in a box office hit since "The Young Lions" in 1958, the last year he had ranked as one of the Top Ten Box Office Stars and the year of his last Academy Award nomination, for "Sayonara." Brando's performance as Vito Corleone, the "Don," in "The Godfather" (1972), Francis Ford Coppola's adaptation of Mario Puzo's 1969 best-selling novel of the same name, was a career turning point, putting him back in the Top Ten and winning him his second Best Actor Oscar.

Paramount production chief Robert Evans, who had given Puzo an advance to write "The Godfather" so that Paramount would own the movie rights, hired Coppola after many major directors had turned the movie down because he wanted an Italian-American director who could provide the movie with cultural authenticity. Coppola also came cheap. Evans was conscious of the fact that Paramount's last Mafia movie, "The Brotherhood" (1968) had been a box office bomb, and he believed it was partly due to the fact that the director, Martin Ritt, and the star, Kirk Douglas, were Jews and the film lacked an authentic Italian flavor. The studio originally intended the movie to be a low-budget production set in contemporary times without any major actors, but the phenomenal success of the novel gave Evans the clout to turn "The Godfather" into a prestige picture.

Coppola had developed a list of actors for all the roles, and his list of potential Dons included the Oscar-winning Italian-American Ernest Borgnine, the Italian-American Frank de Kova (best known for playing Chief Wild Eagle on the TV sit-com "F-Troop"), John Marley (a Best Supporting Oscar-nominee for Paramount's 1970 hit movie "Love Story" who was cast as the movie producer Jack Woltz in the picture), the Italian-American Richard Conte (who was cast as Don Corleone's deadly rival Don Emilio Barzini), and Italian movie producer Carlo Ponti. Coppola admitted in a 1975 interview, "We finally figured we had to lure the "best" actor in the world. It was that simple. That boiled down to Laurence Olivier or Marlon Brando, who "are" the greatest actors in the world." The holographic copy of Coppola's cast list shows Brando's name underlined.

Evans told Coppola that he had been thinking of Brando for the part two years earlier, and Puzo had imagined Brando in the part when he wrote the novel and had actually written to him about the part, so Coppola and Evans narrowed it down to Brando. (Ironically, Olivier would compete with Brando for the Best Actor Oscar for his part in "Sleuth." He bested Brando at the 1972 New York Film Critics Circle Awards.) Albert S. Ruddy, whom Paramount assigned to produce the film, agreed with the choice of Brando. However, Paramount studio heads were opposed to casting Brando due to his reputation for difficulty and his long string of box office flops. Brando also had "One-Eyed Jacks" working against him, a troubled production that lost money for Paramount when it was released in 1961. Paramount Pictures President Stanley Jaffe told an exasperated Coppola, "As long as I'm president of this studio, Marlon Brando will not be in this picture, and I will no longer allow you to discuss it."

Jaffe eventually set three conditions for the casting of Brando: That he would have to take a fee far below what he typically received; he'd have to agree to accept financial responsibility for any production delays his behavior cost; and he had to submit to a screen test. Coppola convinced Brando to a videotaped "make-up" test, in which Brando did his own makeup (he used cotton balls to simulate the character's puffed cheeks). Coppola had feared Brando might be too young to play the Don, but was electrified by the actor's characterization as the head of a crime family. Even so, he had to fight the studio in order to cast the temperamental actor. Brando had doubts himself, stating in his autobiography, "I had never played an Italian before, and I didn't think I could do it successfully." Eventually, Charles Bluhdorn, the president of Paramount parent Gulf+Western, was won over to letting Brando have the role; when he saw the screen test, he asked in amazement, "What are we watching? Who is this old guinea?" Brando was signed for a low fee of $50,000, but in his contract, he was given a percentage of the gross on a sliding scale: 1% of the gross for each $10 million over a $10 million threshold, up to 5% if the picture exceeded $60 million. According to Evans, Brando sold back his points in the picture for $100,000, as he was in dire need of funds. "That $100,000 cost him $11 million," Evans claimed.

In a 1994 interview that can be found on the Academy of Achievement website, Coppola insisted, ""The Godfather" was a very unappreciated movie when we were making it. They were very unhappy with it. They didn't like the cast. They didn't like the way I was shooting it. I was always on the verge of getting fired." When word of this reached Brando, he threatened to walk off the picture, writing in his memoir, "I strongly believe that directors are entitled to independence and freedom to realize their vision, though Francis left the characterizations in our hands and we had to figure out what to do." In a 2010 television interview with Larry King, Al Pacino also talked about how Brando's support helped him keep the role of Michael Corleone in the movie—despite the fact Coppola wanted to fire him. Brando was on his best behavior during filming, buoyed by a cast that included Pacino, Robert Duvall, James Caan and Diane Keaton. In the "Vanity Fair" article "The Godfather Wars", Mark Seals writes, "With the actors, as in the movie, Brando served as the head of the family. He broke the ice by toasting the group with a glass of wine. 'When we were young, Brando was like the godfather of actors,' says Robert Duvall. 'I used to meet with Dustin Hoffman in Cromwell's Drugstore, and if we mentioned his name once, we mentioned it 25 times in a day.' Caan adds, 'The first day we met Brando everybody was in awe.'"

Brando's performance was glowingly reviewed by critics. "I thought it would be interesting to play a gangster, maybe for the first time in the movies, who wasn't like those bad guys Edward G. Robinson played, but who is kind of a hero, a man to be respected," Brando recalled in his autobiography. "Also, because he had so much power and unquestioned authority, I thought it would be an interesting contrast to play him as a gentle man, unlike Al Capone, who beat up people with baseball bats." Duvall later marveled to A&E's "Biography", "He minimized the sense of beginning. In other words he, like, deemphasized the word "action". He would go in front of that camera just like he was before. "Cut!" It was all the same. There was really no beginning. I learned a lot from watching that." Brando won the Academy Award for Best Actor for his performance, but he declined it, becoming the second actor to refuse a Best Actor award (after George C. Scott for "Patton"). He boycotted the award ceremony, instead sending American Indian rights activist Sacheen Littlefeather, who appeared in full Apache attire, to state Brando's reasons, which were based on his objection to the depiction of American Indians by Hollywood and television.

The actor followed "The Godfather" with Bernardo Bertolucci's 1972 film "Last Tango in Paris" opposite Maria Schneider, but Brando's highly noted performance threatened to be overshadowed by an uproar over the sexual content of the film. Brando portrays a recent American widower named Paul, who begins an anonymous sexual relationship with a young, betrothed Parisian woman named Jeanne. As with previous films, Brando refused to memorize his lines for many scenes; instead, he wrote his lines on cue cards and posted them around the set for easy reference, leaving Bertolucci with the problem of keeping them out of the picture frame. The film features several intense, graphic scenes involving Brando, including Paul anally raping Jeanne using butter as a lubricant and Paul's angry, emotionally charged final confrontation with the corpse of his dead wife. The controversial movie was a hit, however, and Brando made the list of Top Ten Box Office Stars for the last time. The voting membership of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts & Sciences again nominated Brando for Best Actor, his seventh nomination. Although Brando won the 1973 New York Film Critics Circle Awards, the actor did not appear at the ceremony or send a representative to pick up the award if he won.

Critic Pauline Kael, in her famous "New Yorker" review, wrote "The movie breakthrough has finally come. Bertolucci and Brando have altered the face of an art form." Brando confessed in his autobiography, "To this day I can't say what "Last Tango in Paris" was about," and added the film "required me to do a lot of emotional arm wrestling with myself, and when it was finished, I decided that I wasn't ever again going to destroy myself emotionally to make a movie. I felt I had violated my innermost self and I didn't want to suffer like that anymore ... You can't fake it."

In 1973, Brando was devastated by the death of his childhood best friend Wally Cox. Brando slept in Cox's pajamas and wrenched his ashes from his widow. She was going to sue for their return, but finally said "I think Marlon needs the ashes more than I do."

In 1976, Brando appeared in "The Missouri Breaks" with his friend Jack Nicholson. The movie also reunited the actor with director Arthur Penn. As biographer Stefan Kanfer describes, Penn had difficulty controlling Brando, who seemed intent on going over the top with his border-ruffian-turned-contract-killer Robert E. Lee Clayton: "Marlon made him a cross-dressing psychopath. Absent for the first hour of the movie, Clayton enters on horseback, dangling upside down, caparisoned in white buckskin, Littlefeather-style. He speaks in an Irish accent for no apparent reason. Over the next hour, also for no apparent reason, Clayton assumes the intonation of a British upper-class twit and an elderly frontier woman, complete with a granny dress and matching bonnet. Penn, who believed in letting actors do their thing, indulged Marlon all the way." Critics were unkind, with "The Observer" calling Brando's performance "one of the most extravagant displays of "grandedamerie" since Sarah Bernhardt", while "The Sun" complained, "Marlon Brando at fifty-two has the sloppy belly of a sixty-two-year-old, the white hair of a seventy-two-year-old, and the lack of discipline of a precocious twelve-year-old." However, Kanfer noted: "Even though his late work was met with disapproval, a re-examination shows that often, in the middle of the most pedestrian scene, there would be a sudden, luminous occurrence, a flash of the old Marlon that showed how capable he remained."

In 1977, Brando made a rare television appearance in the miniseries "", portraying George Lincoln Rockwell; he won a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Miniseries or a Movie for his performance. In 1978, he narrated the English version of "Raoni", a French-Belgian documentary film directed by Jean-Pierre Dutilleux and Luiz Carlos Saldanha that focused on the life of Raoni Metuktire and issues surrounding the survival of the indigenous Indian tribes of north central Brazil. Brando portrayed Superman's father Jor-El in the 1978 film "Superman". He agreed to the role only on assurance that he would be paid a large sum for what amounted to a small part, that he would not have to read the script beforehand, and that his lines would be displayed somewhere off-camera. It was revealed in a documentary contained in the 2001 DVD release of "Superman" that he was paid $3.7 million for two weeks of work. Brando also filmed scenes for the movie's sequel, "Superman II", but after producers refused to pay him the same percentage he received for the first movie, he denied them permission to use the footage. "I asked for my usual percentage," he recollected in his memoir, "but they refused, and so did I." However, after Brando's death, the footage was reincorporated into the 2006 re-cut of the film, "" and in the 2006 "loose sequel" "Superman Returns", in which both used and unused archive footage of him as Jor-El from the first two "Superman" films was remastered for a scene in the Fortress of Solitude, and Brando's voice-overs were used throughout the film.

Brando starred as Colonel Walter E. Kurtz in Francis Ford Coppola's Vietnam epic "Apocalypse Now" (1979). He plays a highly decorated U.S. Army Special Forces officer who goes renegade, running his own operation based in Cambodia and is feared by the U.S. military as much as the Vietnamese. Brando was paid $1 million a week for 3 weeks work. The film drew attention for its lengthy and troubled production, as Eleanor Coppola's documentary "Hearts of Darkness: A Filmmaker's Apocalypse" documents: Brando showed up on the set overweight, Martin Sheen suffered a heart attack, and severe weather destroyed several expensive sets. The film's release was also postponed several times while Coppola edited millions of feet of footage. In the documentary, Coppola talks about how astonished he was when an overweight Brando turned up for his scenes and, feeling desperate, decided to portray Kurtz, who appears emaciated in the original story, as a man who had indulged every aspect of himself. Coppola: "He was already heavy when I hired him and he promised me that he was going to get in shape and I imagined that I would, if he were heavy, I could use that. But he was "so" fat, he was very, very shy about it ... He was very, very adamant about how he didn't want to portray himself that way." Brando admitted to Coppola that he had not read the book, "Heart of Darkness", as the director had asked him to, and the pair spent days exploring the story and the character of Kurtz, much to the actor's financial benefit, according to producer Fred Roos: "The clock was ticking on this deal he had and we had to finish him within three weeks or we'd go into this very expensive overage ... And Francis and Marlon would be talking about the character and whole days would go by. And this is at Marlon's urging—and yet he's getting paid for it."

Upon release, "Apocalypse Now" earned critical acclaim, as did Brando's performance. His whispering of Kurtz's final words ""The horror! The horror!"", has become particularly famous. Roger Ebert, writing in the "Chicago Sun-Times", defended the movie's controversial "denouement", opining that the ending, "with Brando's fuzzy, brooding monologues and final violence, feels more satisfactory than any conventional ending possibly could."

After appearing as oil tycoon Adam Steiffel in 1980's "The Formula", which was poorly received critically, Brando announced his retirement from acting. However, he returned in 1989 in "A Dry White Season", based on André Brink's 1979 anti-apartheid novel. Brando agreed to do the film for free, but fell out with director Euzhan Palcy over how the film was edited; he even made a rare television appearance in an interview with Connie Chung to voice his disapproval. In his memoir, he maintained that Palcy "had cut the picture so poorly, I thought, that the inherent drama of this conflict was vague at best." Brando received praise for his performance, earning an Academy Award nomination for Best Supporting Actor and winning the Best Actor Award at the Tokyo Film Festival. Brando also scored enthusiastic reviews for his caricature of his Vito Corleone role as Carmine Sabatini in 1990's "The Freshman." In his original review, Roger Ebert wrote, "There have been a lot of movies where stars have repeated the triumphs of their parts—but has any star ever done it more triumphantly than Marlon Brando does in "The Freshman"?" "Variety" also praised Brando's performance as Sabatini and noted, "Marlon Brando's sublime comedy performance elevates "The Freshman" from screwball comedy to a quirky niche in film history." Brando also starred alongside his friend Johnny Depp in the box office hit "Don Juan DeMarco" (1995) and in Depp's controversial "The Brave" (1997), which was never released in the United States. Later performances, such as his appearance in "" (1992) (for which he was nominated for a Raspberry as "Worst Supporting Actor"), "The Island of Dr. Moreau" (in which he won a "Worst Supporting Actor" Raspberry) (1996), and his barely recognizable appearance in "Free Money" (1998), resulted in some of the worst reviews of his career. However, his last completed film, "The Score" (2001), was received generally positively. In the film, in which he portrays a fence, he starred with Robert De Niro, who had portrayed Vito Corleone in "The Godfather Part II".
Brando conceived the idea of a novel called "Fan-Tan" with director Donald Cammell in 1979, which was not released until 2005.

Brando's notoriety, his troubled family life, and his obesity attracted more attention than his late acting career. He gained a great deal of weight in the 1960s and by the early to mid-1990s he weighed over and suffered from Type 2 diabetes. He had a history of weight fluctuation throughout his career that, by and large, he attributed to his years of stress-related overeating followed by compensatory dieting. He also earned a reputation for being difficult on the set, often unwilling or unable to memorize his lines and less interested in taking direction than in confronting the film director with odd demands.

He also dabbled with some innovation in his last years. He had several patents issued in his name from the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office, all of which involve a method of tensioning drumheads, in June 2002 – November 2004. (For example, see and its equivalents).

In 2004, Brando recorded voice tracks for the character Mrs. Sour in the unreleased animated film "Big Bug Man". This was his last role and his only role as a female character.

The actor was a longtime close friend of entertainer Michael Jackson and paid regular visits to his Neverland Ranch, resting there for weeks at a time. Brando also participated in the singer's two-day solo career 30th-anniversary celebration concerts in 2001, and starred in his 13-minute-long music video, "You Rock My World," in the same year. On Jackson's 30th anniversary concert, Brando gave a rambling speech to the audience on humanitarian work which received a poor reaction and was unaired.

The actor's son, Miko, was Jackson's bodyguard and assistant for several years, and was a friend of the singer. He stated, "The last time my father left his house to go anywhere, to spend any kind of time ... was with Michael Jackson. He loved it ... He had a 24-hour chef, 24-hour security, 24-hour help, 24-hour kitchen, 24-hour maid service." "Michael was instrumental helping my father through the last few years of his life. For that I will always be indebted to him. Dad had a hard time breathing in his final days, and he was on oxygen much of the time. He loved the outdoors, so Michael would invite him over to Neverland. Dad could name all the trees there, and the flowers, but being on oxygen it was hard for him to get around and see them all, it's such a big place. So Michael got Dad a golf cart with a portable oxygen tank so he could go around and enjoy Neverland. They'd just drive around—Michael Jackson, Marlon Brando, with an oxygen tank in a golf cart."

In April 2001, Brando was hospitalized with pneumonia.

In 2004, Brando signed with Tunisian film director Ridha Behi and began pre-production on a project to be titled "Brando and Brando". Up to a week before his death, he was working on the script in anticipation of a July/August 2004 start date. Production was suspended in July 2004 following Brando's death, at which time Behi stated that he would continue the film as an homage to Brando, with a new title of "Citizen Brando".

On July 1, 2004, Brando died of respiratory failure from pulmonary fibrosis with congestive heart failure at the UCLA Medical Center. The cause of death was initially withheld, with his lawyer citing privacy concerns. He also suffered from failing eyesight caused by diabetes and liver cancer. Shortly before his death and despite needing an oxygen mask to breathe, he recorded his voice to appear in "The Godfather: The Game", once again as Don Vito Corleone. However, Brando only recorded one line due to his health and an impersonator was hired to finish his lines. Some lines from his character were directly lifted from the film.

Karl Malden—a fellow actor in "A Streetcar Named Desire", "On the Waterfront", and "One-Eyed Jacks" (the only film directed by Brando)—talks in a documentary accompanying the DVD of "A Streetcar Named Desire" about a phone call he received from Brando shortly before Brando's death. A distressed Brando told Malden he kept falling over. Malden wanted to come over, but Brando put him off, telling him there was no point. Three weeks later, Brando was dead. Shortly before his death, he had apparently refused permission for tubes carrying oxygen to be inserted into his lungs, which, he was told, was the only way to prolong his life.

Brando was cremated, and his ashes were put in with those of his childhood friend, comedian and actor Wally Cox and another longtime friend, Sam Gilman. They were then scattered partly in Tahiti and partly in Death Valley. In 2007, a 165-minute biopic of Brando for Turner Classic Movies, "Brando: The Documentary", produced by Mike Medavoy (the executor of Brando's will), was released.

Brando was known for his tumultuous personal life and his large number of wives, girlfriends and children. He was the father to eleven children, three of whom were adopted. In 1976, he told a French journalist, "Homosexuality is so much in fashion, it no longer makes news. Like a large number of men, I, too, have had homosexual experiences, and I am not ashamed. I have never paid much attention to what people think about me. But if there is someone who is convinced that Jack Nicholson and I are lovers, may they continue to do so. I find it amusing."

In "Songs My Mother Taught Me", Brando wrote he met Marilyn Monroe at a party where she played piano, unnoticed by anybody else there, that they had an affair and maintained an intermittent relationship for many years, and that he received a telephone call from her several days before she died. He also claimed numerous other romances, although he did not discuss his marriages, his wives, or his children in his autobiography.

He met nisei actress and dancer Reiko Sato in the early 1950s; in 1954 Dorothy Kilgallen reported they were an item. Though their relationship cooled, they remained friends for the rest of Sato's life, with her dividing her time between Los Angeles and Tetiaroa in her later years.

Brando married actress Anna Kashfi in 1957. Kashfi was born in Calcutta and moved to Wales from India in 1947. She is said to have been the daughter of a Welsh steel worker of Irish descent, William O'Callaghan, who had been superintendent on the Indian State railways. However, in her book, "Brando for Breakfast", she claimed that she really is half Indian and that the press incorrectly thought that her stepfather, O'Callaghan, was her biological father. She said that her biological father was Indian and that she was the result of an "unregistered alliance" between her parents. Brando and Kashfi had a son, Christian Brando, on May 11, 1958; they divorced in 1959.

In 1960, Brando married Movita Castaneda, a Mexican-American actress seven years his senior; they were divorced in 1962. Castaneda had appeared in the first "Mutiny on the Bounty" film in 1935, some 27 years before the 1962 remake with Brando as Fletcher Christian. They had two children together: Miko Castaneda Brando (born 1961) and Rebecca Brando (born 1966).

Tahitian actress Tarita Teriipaia, who played Brando's love interest in "Mutiny on the Bounty", became his third wife on August 10, 1962. She was 20 years old, 18 years younger than Brando, who was reportedly delighted by her naïveté. Because Teriipaia was a native French speaker, Brando became fluent in the language and gave numerous interviews in French. Teriipaia became the mother of two of his children: Simon Teihotu Brando (born 1963) and Tarita Cheyenne Brando (born 1970). Brando also adopted Teriipaia's daughter, Maimiti Brando (born 1977) and niece, Raiatua Brando (born 1982). Brando and Teriipaia divorced in July 1972.

Brando had a long-term relationship with his housekeeper Maria Cristina Ruiz, by whom he had three children: Ninna Priscilla Brando (born May 13, 1989), Myles Jonathan Brando (born January 16, 1992), and Timothy Gahan Brando (born January 6, 1994). Brando also adopted Petra Brando-Corval (born 1972), the daughter of his assistant Caroline Barrett and novelist James Clavell.

Brando's close friendship with Wally Cox was the subject of rumors. Brando told a journalist: "If Wally had been a woman, I would have married him and we would have lived happily ever after." Two of Cox's wives, however, dismissed the suggestion that the love was more than platonic.

Brando's grandson Tuki Brando (born 1990), son of Cheyenne Brando, is a fashion model. His numerous grandchildren also include Michael Brando (born 1988), son of Christian Brando, Prudence Brando and Shane Brando, children of Miko C. Brando, the children of Rebecca Brando, and the three children of Teihotu Brando among others.

Stephen Blackehart has been reported to be the son of Brando. Blackehart disputes this claim.

Brando earned a reputation as a 'bad boy' for his public outbursts and antics. According to "Los Angeles" magazine, "Brando was rock and roll before anybody knew what rock and roll was." His behavior during the filming of "Mutiny on the Bounty" (1962) seemed to bolster his reputation as a difficult star. He was blamed for a change in director and a runaway budget, though he disclaimed responsibility for either. On June 12, 1973, Brando broke paparazzo Ron Galella's jaw. Galella had followed Brando, who was accompanied by talk show host Dick Cavett, after a taping of "The Dick Cavett Show" in New York City. He reportedly paid a $40,000 out-of-court settlement and suffered an infected hand as a result. Galella wore a football helmet the next time he photographed Brando at a gala benefiting the American Indians Development Association.

The filming of "Mutiny on the Bounty" affected Brando's life in a profound way, as he fell in love with Tahiti and its people. He bought a 12-island atoll, Tetiaroa, and in 1970 hired an award-winning young Los Angeles architect, Bernard Judge, to build his home and natural village there without despoiling the environment. An environmental laboratory protecting sea birds and turtles was established and student groups were welcomed there for many years. Tragically, the 1983 hurricane destroyed many of the structures including his resort. A hotel using Brando's name, The Brando Resort was officially opened to the public in 2014. Brando was an active ham radio operator, with the call signs KE6PZH and FO5GJ (the latter from his island). He was listed in the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) records as Martin Brandeaux to preserve his privacy.

In the A&E "Biography" episode on Brando, biographer Peter Manso comments, "On the one hand, being a celebrity allowed Marlon to take his revenge on the world that had so deeply hurt him, so deeply scarred him. On the other hand he hated it because he knew it was false and ephemeral." In the same program another biographer, David Thomson, relates, "Many, many people who worked with him, and came to work with him with the best intentions, went away in despair saying he's a spoiled kid. It has to be done his way or he goes away with some vast story about how he was wronged, he was offended, and I think that fits with the psychological pattern that he was a wronged kid."

In 1946, Brando performed in Ben Hecht's Zionist play "A Flag is Born". He attended some fundraisers for John F. Kennedy in the 1960 presidential election. In August 1963, he participated in the March on Washington along with fellow celebrities Harry Belafonte, James Garner, Charlton Heston, Burt Lancaster and Sidney Poitier. Along with Paul Newman, Brando also participated in the freedom rides.

In the aftermath of the 1968 assassination of Martin Luther King, Jr., Brando made one of the strongest commitments to furthering King's work. Shortly after King's death, he announced that he was bowing out of the lead role of a major film ("The Arrangement") (1969) which was about to begin production in order to devote himself to the civil rights movement. "I felt I'd better go find out where it is; what it is to be black in this country; what this rage is all about," Brando said on the late-night ABC-TV talk show "Joey Bishop Show". In A&E's "Biography" episode on Brando, actor and co-star Martin Sheen states, "I'll never forget the night that Reverend King was shot and I turned on the news and Marlon was walking through Harlem with Mayor Lindsay. And there were snipers and there was a lot of unrest and he kept walking and talking through those neighborhoods with Mayor Lindsay. It was one of the most incredible acts of courage I ever saw, and it meant a lot and did a lot."

Brando's participation in the civil rights movement actually began well before King's death. In the early 1960s, he contributed thousands of dollars to both the Southern Christian Leadership Conference (S.C.L.C.) and to a scholarship fund established for the children of slain Mississippi N.A.A.C.P. leader Medgar Evers. In 1964 Brando was arrested at a "fish-in" held to protest a broken treaty that had promised Native Americans fishing rights in Puget Sound. By this time, Brando was already involved in films that carried messages about human rights: "Sayonara", which addressed interracial romance, and "The Ugly American", depicting the conduct of U.S. officials abroad and the deleterious effect on the citizens of foreign countries. For a time, he was also donating money to the Black Panther Party and considered himself a friend of founder Bobby Seale. Brando ended his financial support for the group over his perception of its increasing radicalization, specifically a passage in a Panther pamphlet put out by Eldridge Cleaver advocating indiscriminate violence, "for the Revolution."

At the 1973 Academy Awards ceremony, Brando refused to accept the Oscar for his performance in "The Godfather". Sacheen Littlefeather represented him at the ceremony. She appeared in full Apache attire and stated that owing to the "poor treatment of Native Americans in the film industry", Brando would not accept the award. This occurred while the standoff at Wounded Knee was ongoing. The event grabbed the attention of the US and the world media. This was considered a major event and victory for the movement by its supporters and participants.

Outside of his film work, Brando appeared before the California Assembly in support of a fair housing law and personally joined picket lines in demonstrations protesting discrimination in housing developments.

He was also an activist against apartheid. In 1964, he favored a boycott of his films in South Africa to prevent them from being shown to a segregated audience. He took part at a 1975 protest rally against American investments in South Africa and for the release of Nelson Mandela. In 1989, Brando also starred in the film "A Dry White Season", based upon André Brink's novel of the same name.

In an interview in "Playboy" magazine in January 1979, Brando said: "You've seen every single race besmirched, but you never saw an image of the kike because the Jews were ever so watchful for that—and rightly so. They never allowed it to be shown on screen. The Jews have done so much for the world that, I suppose, you get extra disappointed because they didn't pay attention to that."
Brando made a similar comment on "Larry King Live" in April 1996, saying "Hollywood is run by Jews; it is owned by Jews, and they should have a greater sensitivity about the issue of—of people who are suffering. Because they've exploited—we have seen the—we have seen the nigger and greaseball, we've seen the chink, we've seen the slit-eyed dangerous Jap, we have seen the wily Filipino, we've seen everything, but we never saw the kike. Because they knew perfectly well, that that is where you draw the wagons around." Larry King, who is Jewish, replied, "When you say—when you say something like that, you are playing right in, though, to anti-Semitic people who say the Jews are—" Brando interrupted: "No, no, because I will be the first one who will appraise the Jews honestly and say 'Thank God for the Jews'."
Jay Kanter, Brando's agent, producer, and friend, defended him in "Daily Variety": "Marlon has spoken to me for hours about his fondness for the Jewish people, and he is a well-known supporter of Israel." Similarly, Louie Kemp, in his article for "Jewish Journal", wrote: "You might remember him as Don Vito Corleone, Stanley Kowalski or the eerie Col. Walter E. Kurtz in 'Apocalypse Now', but I remember Marlon Brando as a mensch and a personal friend of the Jewish people when they needed it most." In an interview with "NBC Today" one day after Brando's death, King also defended Brando's comments, saying that they had been blown out of proportion and taken out of context.

Brando was one of the most respected actors of the post-war era. He is listed by the American Film Institute as the fourth greatest male star whose screen debut occurred before or during 1950 (it occurred in 1950). He earned respect among critics for his memorable performances and charismatic screen presence. He helped to popularize Method acting. He is regarded as one of the greatest cinema actors of the 20th century.

"Encyclopedia Britannica" describes him as "the most celebrated of the method actors, and his slurred, mumbling delivery marked his rejection of classical dramatic training. His true and passionate performances proved him one of the greatest actors of his generation". It also notes the apparent paradox of his talent: "He is regarded as the most influential actor of his generation, yet his open disdain for the acting profession... often manifested itself in the form of questionable choices and uninspired performances. Nevertheless, he remains a riveting screen presence with a vast emotional range and an endless array of compulsively watchable idiosyncrasies."

Marlon Brando is a cultural icon whose popularity has endured for over six decades. His rise to national attention in the 1950s had a profound effect on American culture.
According to film critic Pauline Kael, "Brando represented a reaction against the post-war mania for security. As a protagonist, the Brando of the early fifties had no code, only his instincts. He was a development from the gangster leader and the outlaw. He was antisocial because he knew society was crap; he was a hero to youth because he was strong enough not to take the crap ... Brando represented a contemporary version of the free American ... Brando is still the most exciting American actor on the screen." Sociologist Dr. Suzanne Mcdonald-Walker states: "Marlon Brando, sporting leather jacket, jeans, and moody glare, became a cultural icon summing up 'the road' in all its maverick glory." His portrayal of the gang leader Johnny Strabler in "The Wild One" has become an iconic image, used both as a symbol of rebelliousness and a fashion accessory that includes a Perfecto style motorcycle jacket, a tilted cap, jeans and sunglasses. Johnny's haircut inspired a craze for sideburns, followed by James Dean and Elvis Presley, among others. Dean copied Brando's acting style extensively and Presley used Brando's image as a model for his role in "Jailhouse Rock". The "I coulda been a contender" scene from "On the Waterfront", according to the author of" Brooklyn Boomer", Martin H. Levinson, is "one of the most famous scenes in motion picture history, and the line itself has become part of America's cultural lexicon." Brando's powerful "Wild One" image was still, as of 2011, being marketed by the makers of his Triumph Thunderbird motorcycle, in a range of clothing inspired by his character from the film and licensed by Brando's estate.

Brando was also considered a male sex symbol. Linda Williams writes: "Marlon Brando [was] the quintessential American male sex symbol of the late fifties and early sixties".

In his autobiography "Songs My Mother Taught Me", Brando observed:
He also confessed that, while having great admiration for the theater, he did not return to it after his initial success primarily because the work left him drained emotionally:
Brando repeatedly credited Stella Adler and her understanding of the Stanislavsky acting technique for bringing realism to American cinema, but also added:
In the 2015 documentary "Listen to Me Marlon", Brando shared his thoughts on playing a death scene, stating, "That's a tough scene to play. You have to make 'em believe that you are dying ... Try to think of the most intimate moment you've ever had in your life." Brando's favorite actors were Spencer Tracy, John Barrymore, Fredric March, James Cagney and Paul Muni.

Upon his death in 2004, Brando left an estate valued at $21.6 million. Brando's estate still earned about $9 million in 2005, the year following his death, according to "Forbes". That year Brando was named one of the top-earning deceased celebrities in the world by the magazine.

Brando was named the fourth greatest male star whose screen debut occurred before or during 1950 by the American Film Institute, and part of "TIME" magazine's . He was also named one of the top 10 "Icons of the Century" by "Variety" magazine.


Notes
Citations
Bibliography



</doc>
<doc id="27834683" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27834683" title="Matthew McConaughey">
Matthew McConaughey

Matthew David McConaughey (; born November 4, 1969) is an American actor, director, producer, and writer. He first gained notice for his breakout role in the coming-of-age comedy "Dazed and Confused" (1993), before going on to appear in the slasher film "" (1994), the legal thriller "A Time to Kill" (1996), the comedy film "Larger than Life" (1996), Steven Spielberg's historical drama "Amistad" (1997), the science fiction drama "Contact" (1997), the comedy "EDtv" (1999), and the war film "U-571" (2000).

In the 2000s, McConaughey became best known for starring in romantic comedies, including "The Wedding Planner" (2001), "How to Lose a Guy in 10 Days" (2003), "Failure to Launch" (2006), "Fool's Gold" (2008), and "Ghosts of Girlfriends Past" (2009). Since 2011, he has preferred dramatic roles, in such films as "The Lincoln Lawyer" (2011), "Bernie" (2011), "Killer Joe" (2011), "The Paperboy" (2012), "Mud" (2012), "Magic Mike" (2012), "The Wolf of Wall Street" (2013), "Interstellar" (2014), "The Sea of Trees" (2015), "Free State of Jones", "Kubo and the Two Strings", "Sing", and "Gold" (all 2016).

McConaughey achieved ample success in 2013 and 2014. In 2013, McConaughey portrayed Ron Woodroof, a cowboy diagnosed with AIDS in the biographical film "Dallas Buyers Club", which earned him the Academy Award, Critics' Choice Movie Award, Golden Globe Award, and Screen Actors Guild Award, all for Best Actor, among other awards and nominations. In 2014, he starred as Rust Cohle in the first season of HBO's crime drama anthology series "True Detective," for which he won the Critics' Choice Television Award and TCA Award, and was nominated for the Primetime Emmy Award, Golden Globe Award, and Screen Actors Guild Award.

Matthew David McConaughey was born on November 4, 1969, in Uvalde, Texas to parents of Irish descent. His mother, Mary Kathleen ("née" McCabe, born 1932), whose family hails from the Cavan/Monaghan area in Ireland, is known as "Kay" or "KMac" and is a former kindergarten teacher and published author who taught McConaughey. She was originally from Trenton, New Jersey. His father, James Donald "Jim" McConaughey (1922–1999), was from Louisiana and ran an oil pipe supply business; he played for the Kentucky Wildcats and the Houston Cougars college football teams. In 1953, Jim was drafted in the 27th round by the NFL's Green Bay Packers. He was released before the season began and never played an official league game in the NFL.

McConaughey's mother and late father married each other three times, having divorced each other twice. He has two older brothers: Michael Patrick McConaughey (born 1954) and Patrick James McConaughey (born 1963, adopted). Michael, nicknamed "Rooster", is a self-made millionaire who stars in the CNBC docu-series "West Texas Investors Club". McConaughey's ancestry includes English, German, Irish, Scottish, and Swedish. He is a relative of Confederate brigadier general Dandridge McRae. He had a Methodist upbringing.

McConaughey moved to Longview, Texas, in 1980, where he attended Longview High School. He lived in Australia for a year, in Warnervale, New South Wales, as a Rotary exchange student in 1988. He attended the University of Texas at Austin (UT-Austin), where he joined Delta Tau Delta fraternity. He began in the fall of 1989 and graduated in the spring of 1993 with a bachelor's degree in Radio-Television-Film. His original plan had changed as he wanted to attend Southern Methodist University until one of his brothers told him that private school tuition would have been a burden on the family's finances. He also had planned to attend law school after graduation from college, but he realized he was not interested in becoming a lawyer.

McConaughey began working in television commercials, including one for the Austin, Texas daily newspaper, the "Austin American-Statesman", which is credited as his first speaking role. The line, "How else am I gonna keep up with my 'Horns?" – a reference to his beloved Texas Longhorns sports teams – gave the local community a look at the young actor, before he was cast in Richard Linklater's film "Dazed and Confused". In 1992, he was cast as "Joe" in Trisha Yearwood's video for her hit song "Walkaway Joe".

After some smaller roles in "Angels in the Outfield", "", "Boys on the Side", the television series "Unsolved Mysteries", and as the male lead in the Trisha Yearwood music video for the song "Walkaway Joe", McConaughey's big break came as the lawyer Jake Brigance in the film "A Time to Kill" (1996), based on the John Grisham novel of the same name. In the late 1990s, McConaughey was cast in leading roles in more movies, including "Contact", "Amistad", "The Newton Boys", "EDtv" and "U-571".

By the early 2000s, he was frequently cast in romantic comedies, including "The Wedding Planner" and "How to Lose a Guy in 10 Days", both of which were successful at the box office. During this period, he appeared as a firefighter in the low-budget film "Tiptoes", with Kate Beckinsale, in "Two for the Money" as a protégé to Al Pacino's gambling mogul, and in "Frailty", with Bill Paxton, who also directed.

McConaughey starred in the 2005 feature film "Sahara", along with Steve Zahn and Penélope Cruz. Prior to the release of the film, he promoted it by sailing down the Amazon River and trekking to Mali. That same year, McConaughey was named "People" magazine's "Sexiest Man Alive" for 2005. In 2006, he co-starred with Sarah Jessica Parker in the romantic comedy "Failure to Launch" and as Marshall head football coach Jack Lengyal in "We Are Marshall". McConaughey also provided voice work in an ad campaign for the Peace Corps in late 2006. He replaced Owen Wilson in Ben Stiller's "Tropic Thunder" after Wilson's suicide attempt. On January 21, 2008, McConaughey became the new spokesman for the national radio campaign, "Beef: It's What's for Dinner", replacing Sam Elliott.

McConaughey recognized that his "lifestyle, living on the beach, running with my shirt off, doing romantic comedies" had caused him to be typecast for certain roles, and he sought dramatic work with other themes. He said:

In 2012, McConaughey starred alongside Channing Tatum in "Magic Mike", based on Tatum's early life, which was directed by Steven Soderbergh. He returned to his East Texas roots, working again with director Richard Linklater on "Bernie," playing district attorney Danny Buck Davidson. In June 2012, McConaughey was invited to join the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences.

In 2013, he portrayed Ron Woodroof in "Dallas Buyers Club." The role of a rodeo rider who discovers he has AIDS and struggles to get treatment required him to lose nearly 50 lb (22 kg). The film gathered wide critical acclaim and earned McConaughey many acting awards, including the Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Male Actor in a Leading Role, the Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Drama, and the coveted Academy Award for Best Actor. His co-star Jared Leto won the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor, making "Dallas Buyers Club" the first film since "Mystic River" (2003) to win both awards. He also featured in Martin Scorsese's "The Wolf of Wall Street" as Mark Hanna, an early boss of Jordan Belfort.

During this time, McConaughey recorded a public service announcement in Austin, Texas for the LBJ Presidential Library. In April 2014, "Time" magazine included McConaughey in its annual Time 100 as one of the "Most Influential People in the World". In August 2014, the Lincoln Motor Company signed a multi-year collaboration with McConaughey for an ad campaign. The commercials, directed by Nicolas Winding Refn ("Drive"), featured McConaughey as a storyteller driving around in Lincoln's MKC crossover. Shortly after the commercials debuted in September 2014, they were parodied by Ellen DeGeneres, Conan O'Brien, Jim Carrey, "South Park," and "Saturday Night Live". Overall sales for Lincoln increased by 25 percent one month after the ads debuted. The series of commercials starring McConaughey continued until October 2015; during this period he also endorsed the MKZ sedan and MKX crossover.

In 2014, he shared star billing with Woody Harrelson in HBO's crime drama anthology series "True Detective." For his role as Rust Cohle, he won the Critics' Choice Television Award for Best Actor in a Drama Series. He was also nominated for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Drama Series, which he lost to Bryan Cranston and the Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Miniseries or Television Film. With his first Oscar win and the critical acclaim received for "True Detective", "McConaughey seems to be tapping into something essential, remaining himself while stretching, getting older while staying the same age." Critic Rachel Syme dubbed his recognition and performances while taking on more complex, dramatic roles as "The McConaissance".

McConaughey also played Cooper, a widowed father and astronaut, alongside Anne Hathaway, Jessica Chastain, Michael Caine, Mackenzie Foy, and Casey Affleck in Christopher Nolan's science fiction film "Interstellar" (2014). After finishing Gus Van Sant's 2015 film "The Sea of Trees" with Ken Watanabe, in 2016, McConaughey starred in two films, "Free State of Jones" and "Gold", and voiced leading characters in two animated films, "Kubo and the Two Strings" and "Sing".

In 2016, McConaughey was hired as creative director and celebrity spokesman for Wild Turkey's latest campaign, to bring in more women and more international customers.

McConaughey starred in the Stephen King adaptation "The Dark Tower" (2017), as Walter Padick. His upcoming roles include true life gangster drama "White Boy Rick", Harmony Korine's "The Beach Bum", and, opposite Diane Lane and Anne Hathaway, in the erotic thriller "Serenity".

McConaughey met Camilla Alves in 2006. The couple became engaged on December 25, 2011, and were married in a private Catholic ceremony on June 9, 2012, in Austin, Texas, where they reside. Together, they have three children: sons Levi Alves McConaughey (born July 7, 2008) and Livingston Alves McConaughey (born December 28, 2012), and daughter Vida Alves McConaughey (born January 3, 2010).

McConaughey is a Christian and attends a non-denominational church.

McConaughey started the "just keep livin" foundation, which is "dedicated to helping teenage kids lead active lives and make healthy choices to become great men and women". On February 25, 2016, McConaughey received the Creative Conscience award from for his work with his foundation.

McConaughey rescued various pets stranded after the flooding of New Orleans from Hurricane Katrina. In 2006, he rescued a cat from two youths in Sherman Oaks, California, before they could set it on fire.

McConaughey is teaching classes at his alma mater, UT-Austin, the first session of which was about the filming of the 2016 film "Free State of Jones". For the second session, he will team with "The Hunger Games" director Gary Ross and university lecturer Scott Rice. The college course, part of the Moody College of Communications, will be open to juniors and seniors. There are no prerequisites or fees to take the once a week course.



</doc>
<doc id="52711" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52711" title="Leonardo DiCaprio">
Leonardo DiCaprio

Leonardo Wilhelm DiCaprio (; born November 11, 1974) is an American actor, film producer, and environmental activist. DiCaprio began his career by appearing in television commercials in the late 1980s, after which he had recurring roles in various television series such as the soap opera "Santa Barbara" and the sitcom "Growing Pains". He began his film career by starring as Josh in "Critters 3" (1991). He starred in the film adaptation of the memoir "This Boy's Life" (1993), and was praised for his supporting role in "What's Eating Gilbert Grape" (1993). He gained public recognition with leading roles in "The Basketball Diaries" (1995) and the romantic drama "Romeo + Juliet" (1996), before achieving international fame with James Cameron's epic romance "Titanic" (1997), which became the highest-grossing film of all time to that point.

Since 2000, DiCaprio has received critical acclaim for his work in a wide range of film genres. DiCaprio's subsequent films include "The Man in the Iron Mask" (1998), the biographical crime drama "Catch Me If You Can" (2002), and the epic historical drama "Gangs of New York" (2002), which marked his first of many collaborations with director Martin Scorsese. He was acclaimed for his performances in the political war thriller "Blood Diamond" (2006), the neo-noir crime drama "The Departed" (2006), the espionage thriller "Body of Lies" (2008), the drama "Revolutionary Road" (2008), the psychological thriller "Shutter Island" (2010), the science fiction thriller "Inception" (2010), the biographical film "J. Edgar" (2011), the western "Django Unchained" (2012), and the period drama "The Great Gatsby" (2013).

DiCaprio's portrayals of Howard Hughes in "The Aviator" (2004) and Hugh Glass in "The Revenant" (2015) won him the Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Motion Picture Drama, and his role as Jordan Belfort in "The Wolf of Wall Street" (2013) won him the award for Best Actor – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy. He also won the Academy Award for Best Actor and BAFTA Award for his performance in "The Revenant". DiCaprio is the founder of his own production company, Appian Way Productions.

Leonardo Wilhelm DiCaprio was born on November 11, 1974, in Los Angeles. He is the only child of Irmelin ("née" Indenbirken), a legal secretary, and George DiCaprio, an underground comix artist and producer and distributor of comic books. DiCaprio's father is of Italian (from Alife) and German (from Bavaria) descent. DiCaprio's maternal grandfather, Wilhelm Indenbirken, was German. His maternal grandmother, Helene Indenbirken (born Yelena Smirnova; 1915–2008), was a Russian-born German citizen. In an interview in Russia, DiCaprio referred to himself as "half-Russian" and said that two of his grandparents were Russian. DiCaprio's parents met while attending college and subsequently moved to Los Angeles, California.

DiCaprio was named Leonardo because his pregnant mother was looking at a Leonardo da Vinci painting in the Uffizi museum in Florence, Italy, when he first kicked. His parents separated when he was a year old, and he lived mostly with his mother. The two lived in several Los Angeles neighborhoods, such as Echo Park and Los Feliz (his Los Feliz residence was later converted into a public library), while his mother worked several jobs. DiCaprio attended Seeds Elementary School (now UCLA Lab School) and John Marshall High School a few blocks away, after attending the Los Angeles Center for Enriched Studies for four years. However, he dropped out of high school following his third year, eventually earning his general equivalency diploma (GED). DiCaprio spent part of his childhood in Germany with his maternal grandparents, Wilhelm and Helene. He is conversant in German and Italian.

DiCaprio was also a contestant on the children's game show "Fun House". One of the stunts he performed on the show was going fishing in a small pool of water by catching the fish only with his teeth.

DiCaprio's career began with his appearance in several commercials and educational films. After being removed from the set of children's television series "Romper Room" for being disruptive at the age of five, he followed his older stepbrother Adam Farrar into television commercials, landing an ad for Matchbox cars at 14. In 1990, he got his break on television when he was cast in the short-lived series based on the movie "Parenthood". After "Parenthood", DiCaprio had bit parts on several shows, including "The New Lassie" and "Roseanne", as well as a brief stint on the soap opera "Santa Barbara", playing the young Mason Capwell. His involvement in "Parenthood" and the daily soap earned him a nomination for the Young Artist Award for Best Young Actor each.

DiCaprio's debut film role was in the comedic sci-fi horror film "Critters 3", in which he played the stepson of an evil landlord, a role that DiCaprio described as "your average, no-depth, standard kid with blond hair." Released in 1991, the movie went direct-to-video. Soon after, he became a recurring cast member on the ABC sitcom "Growing Pains", playing Luke Brower, a homeless boy who is taken in by the Seaver family. DiCaprio made his big screen breakthrough in 1992, when he was handpicked by Robert De Niro out of 400 young actors to play the lead role in "This Boy's Life".

Later in 1993, DiCaprio co-starred as the mentally handicapped brother of Johnny Depp's character in "What's Eating Gilbert Grape", a comic-tragic odyssey of a dysfunctional Iowa family. Director Lasse Hallström admitted he was initially looking for a less good-looking actor but finally settled on DiCaprio as he had emerged as "the most observant actor" among all auditionees. Budgeted at US$11 million, the film became a critical success, resulting in various accolades for DiCaprio, who was awarded the National Board of Review Award and nominated for both an Academy Award and a Golden Globe for his portrayal. "New York Times" critic Janet Maslin praised DiCaprio's performance, writing "the film's real show-stopping turn comes from Mr. DiCaprio, who makes Arnie's many tics so startling and vivid that at first he is difficult to watch. The performance has a sharp, desperate intensity from beginning to end."

DiCaprio's first effort of 1995 was Sam Raimi's "The Quick and the Dead", a western film. Sony Pictures was dubious over DiCaprio's casting, and as a result, co-star Sharon Stone decided to pay the actor's salary herself. The film was released to a dismal box office performance, barely grossing US$18.5 million in the US, and received mixed reviews from critics. DiCaprio next starred in "Total Eclipse", a fictionalized account of the homosexual relationship between Arthur Rimbaud and Paul Verlaine. He replaced River Phoenix, who died during pre-production on the project. A minor art-house success, the film grossed US$0.34 million throughout its domestic theatrical run.

DiCaprio appeared in the mostly improvised short film called "Don's Plum", as a favor to aspiring director R. D. Robb. When Robb decided to expand the black-and-white film to feature length, however, DiCaprio and costar Tobey Maguire had its release blocked by court order, arguing that they never intended to make it a theatrical release, as it would have commercial value thanks to their stardom. The film eventually premiered at the 2001 Berlin International Film Festival, where it was well received by critics. DiCaprio's last film of the year 1995 was "The Basketball Diaries", a biographical film about Jim Carroll.

In 1996, DiCaprio appeared opposite Claire Danes in Baz Luhrmann's film "Romeo + Juliet", an abridged modernization of William Shakespeare's romantic tragedy of the same name, which retained the original Shakespearean dialogue. The project achieved a worldwide box office take of $147 million.

Later that year, he starred in Jerry Zaks' family drama "Marvin's Room", reuniting with Robert De Niro. Based on Scott McPherson's screenplay adaptation of his own 1991 stage play of the same name, the film revolves around two sisters, played by Meryl Streep and Diane Keaton, who are reunited through tragedy after 17 years of estrangement. DiCaprio portrayed Hank, Streep's character's troubled son, who has been committed to a mental asylum for setting fire to his mother's house.

In 1997, DiCaprio starred in James Cameron's "Titanic" (1997) as twenty-year-old Jack Dawson, a penniless Wisconsin man who wins two tickets for the third-class on the ill-fated RMS "Titanic". DiCaprio initially refused to portray the character but was eventually encouraged to pursue the role by Cameron, who strongly believed in his acting ability. Against expectations, the film went on to become the highest-grossing film to date (it was surpassed in 2010 by Cameron's film "Avatar"), grossing more than $1.843 billion in box-office receipts worldwide, and transformed DiCaprio into a commercial movie superstar, resulting in fan worship among teenage girls and young women in general that became known as "Leo-Mania". In May 1998, for example, his face appeared on the covers of at least four teen magazines, and three books about DiCaprio were among the top six paperbacks on "The New York Times" Best Seller list. More than 200 fans contacted the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences to protest his not being nominated for the 70th Academy Awards. He was nominated for other high-profile awards, including a second Golden Globe nomination. Upon the success of "Titanic", DiCaprio stated in 2000: "I have no connection with me during that whole "Titanic" phenomenon and what my face became around the world [...] I'll never reach that state of popularity again, and I don't expect to. It's not something I'm going to try to achieve either."

The following year, DiCaprio made a self-mocking cameo appearance in Woody Allen's caustic satire of the fame industry, "Celebrity" (1998). That year, he also starred in the dual roles of the villainous King Louis XIV and his secret, sympathetic twin brother Philippe in Randall Wallace's "The Man in the Iron Mask", based on the same-titled 1939 film. Despite receiving a rather mixed to negative response, the film became a box office success, grossing US$180 million internationally. Though DiCaprio's performance was generally well-received, with "Entertainment Weekly" critic Owen Gleiberman writing that "the shockingly androgynous DiCaprio looks barely old enough to be playing anyone with hormones, but he's a fluid and instinctive actor, with the face of a mischievous angel," he was awarded a Golden Raspberry Award for Worst Screen Couple for both incarnations the following year.

DiCaprio's next project was the drama film "The Beach" (2000), an adaption of Alex Garland's 1996 novel of the same name. He played an American backpacking tourist looking for the perfect way of life in a secret island commune in the Gulf of Thailand. Budgeted at $US50 million, the film became a financial success, grossing $US144 million worldwide, but as with DiCaprio's previous project, the film was negatively reviewed by critics. Todd McCarthy of "Variety" noted that "Richard [DiCaprio's role] is too much the American Everyman and not enough of a well-defined individual to entirely capture one's interest and imagination, and DiCaprio, while perfectly watchable, does not endow him with the quirks or distinguishing marks to make this man from nowhere a dimensional character." The next year, he was nominated for another Razzie Award for his work on the film.

DiCaprio's first film of 2002 was the biographical crime drama film "Catch Me If You Can", based on the life of Frank Abagnale Jr., who, before his 19th birthday, used his charm, confidence, and several different personas, to make millions in the 1960s writing bad checks. Directed by Steven Spielberg, the film was shot in 147 different locations in only 52 days, making it "the most adventurous, super-charged movie-making" DiCaprio had experienced yet. "Catch Me If You Can" received favorable reviews and proved to be an international success, becoming DiCaprio's highest-grossing film since "Titanic" with a total of US$351.1 million worldwide. Roger Ebert praised his performance, and noted that while "DiCaprio, who in recent films [...] has played dark and troubled characters, is breezy and charming here, playing a boy who discovers what he is good at, and does it." The following year, DiCaprio received his third Golden Globe nomination for his work in the film.

Also in 2002, DiCaprio appeared in Martin Scorsese's "Gangs of New York", a historical film set in the mid-19th century in the Five Points district of New York City. Director Scorsese initially struggled selling his idea of realizing the film until DiCaprio became interested in playing protagonist Amsterdam Vallon, a young leader of the Irish faction, and thus, Miramax Films got involved with financing the project. Nonetheless production on the film was plagued by blown-out budgets and producer-director squabbles, resulting in a marathon eight-month shoot and, at US$103 million, the most expensive film Scorsese had ever made. Upon its release, "Gangs of New York" became a financial and critical success. DiCaprio's acting was well-received but was overshadowed by Daniel Day-Lewis' performance among most critics.
Forging a collaboration with Scorsese, the two paired again for a biopic of the eccentric and obsessive American film director and aviation pioneer Howard Hughes in "The Aviator" (2004). Centering on Hughes' life from the late 1920s to 1947, DiCaprio initially developed the project with Michael Mann, who decided against directing it after back-to-back film biographies in "Ali" and "The Insider". The actor eventually pitched John Logan's script to Scorsese, who quickly signed on to direct. "The Aviator" became a critical and financial success. DiCaprio received rave reviews for his performance and won a Golden Globe Award for Best Actor, also receiving another Academy Award nomination.

In 2005, DiCaprio was made a commander of the "Ordre des Arts et des Lettres" by the French Minister of Culture for his contributions to the arts. The following year, the actor starred in both "Blood Diamond" and "The Departed". In Edward Zwick's war film "Blood Diamond", he starred as a diamond smuggler from Rhodesia who is involved in the Sierra Leone Civil War. The film itself received generally favorable reviews, and DiCaprio was praised for the authenticity of his South African Afrikaner accent, known as a difficult accent to imitate. In Scorsese's "The Departed" he played the role of Billy Costigan, a state trooper working undercover in an Irish Mob in Boston. Highly anticipated, the film was released to overwhelmingly positive reviews and became one of the highest-rated wide release films of 2006. Budgeted at US$90 million, it also emerged as DiCaprio and Scorsese's highest-grossing collaboration to date, easily beating "The Aviator"´s previous record of US$213.7 million. DiCaprio's performance in "The Departed" was applauded by critics and earned him a Satellite Award for Best Supporting Actor. The same year, both the Golden Globes and the Screen Actors Guild nominated DiCaprio twice in the Best Actor category for both of his 2006 features, and in addition, DiCaprio earned his third Academy Award nomination for "Blood Diamond".

In 2008, DiCaprio starred in "Body of Lies", a spy film based on the novel of the same name by David Ignatius, set in context of the Middle East and the War on Terror, telling the story of three men battling a terrorist organization, and each other. Directed by Ridley Scott, DiCaprio dyed his hair brown and wore brown contacts for the role, which he chose to pursue because he considered it a throwback to political films of the 1970s such as "The Parallax View" (1974) and "Three Days of the Condor" (1975). The film received mixed reviews from critics, and at a budget of US$67.5 million, became a moderate box office success, grossing US$115 million worldwide.

The same year, DiCaprio reunited with Kate Winslet to film the drama "Revolutionary Road" (2008), directed by Winslet's then-husband Sam Mendes. As both actors had been reluctant to make romantic films similar to "Titanic", it was Winslet who suggested that both should work with her on a film adaptation of the 1961 novel of the same name by Richard Yates after reading the script by Justin Haythe, knowing that plot had little in common with the 1997 blockbuster. Once DiCaprio agreed to do the film, it went almost immediately into production. He noted that he saw his character as "unheroic" and "slightly cowardly" and that he was "willing to be just a product of his environment." Portraying a couple in a failing marriage in the 1950s, DiCaprio and Winslet watched period videos promoting life in the suburbs to prepare themselves for " Revolutionary Road", which eventually earned them favorable reviews. For his portrayal DiCaprio garnered his seventh Golden Globes nomination.

DiCaprio continued his collaborative streak with Scorsese in the 2010 psychological thriller film "Shutter Island" (2010), based on the 2003 novel of the same name by Dennis Lehane. He played U.S. Marshal Edward "Teddy" Daniels, who is investigating a psychiatric facility located on an island and comes to question his own sanity. The film grossed $294 million.

Also in 2010, DiCaprio starred in director Christopher Nolan's science-fiction film "Inception", also starring Marion Cotillard, Tom Hardy, Joseph Gordon-Levitt, Cillian Murphy, Ken Watanabe, Tom Berenger and Michael Caine. Inspired by the experience of lucid dreaming and dream incubation, DiCaprio portrays the character of Dom Cobb, an "extractor" who enters the dreams of others to obtain information that is otherwise inaccessible. Cobb is promised a chance to regain his old life in exchange for planting an idea in a corporate target's mind. DiCaprio was "intrigued by this concept — this dream-heist notion and how this character's gonna unlock his dreamworld and ultimately affect his real life." Released to critical acclaim, the film grossed over $825 million worldwide. To star in this film, DiCaprio agreed to a pay cut from his $20 million fee, in favor of splitting first-dollar gross points, which means he receives money coming directly off the top of ticket sales. This risk paid off, with DiCaprio earning $50 million from the film to become his highest payday yet. The movie went on to become Di Caprio's second highest-grossing movie with $293 million at the box office, after "Titanic" with $659 million and ahead of "The Revenant" with $184 million.

In July 2010, it was announced that DiCaprio had pulled out of a Viking movie to be directed by Mel Gibson amid controversy over Gibson's rage-fueled rant tapes and domestic violence probe.

In 2011, DiCaprio starred alongside Armie Hammer and Naomi Watts in Clint Eastwood's "J. Edgar", a biopic about J. Edgar Hoover. Written by Dustin Lance Black, the film focuses on the career of the FBI director from the Palmer Raids onwards, including an examination of his private life as an alleged closeted homosexual. Reviews towards the film were mostly mixed, with many critics commending DiCaprio's performance but feeling that, overall, the film lacked coherence. Roger Ebert praised DiCaprio's performance as a "fully-realized, subtle and persuasive performance, hinting at more than Hoover ever revealed, perhaps even to himself."

In 2012, DiCaprio starred as villainous Calvin Candie in Quentin Tarantino's spaghetti western, "Django Unchained". While filming "Django Unchained", DiCaprio accidentally cut his hand on glass, but continued filming despite the injury, and Tarantino elected to use the take in the final movie. The film received positive reviews from critics and earned DiCaprio his ninth nomination from the Golden Globes. "Django Unchained" grossed $424 million worldwide.

DiCaprio's next film was "The Great Gatsby", again with Baz Luhrmann (who directed him in "Romeo + Juliet" in 1996), an adaptation of F. Scott Fitzgerald's 1925 novel, also starring Carey Mulligan and Tobey Maguire; the film was released on May 10, 2013. It received mixed reviews from critics, however DiCaprio's portrayal as Jay Gatsby was praised. Critic Rafer Guzman of "Newsday" praised DiCaprio by stating, "As for Leonardo DiCaprio, he is now the Gatsby to beat. Despite a borderline comedic entrance – haloed by fireworks and accompanied by Gershwin's "Rhapsody in Blue"—DiCaprio nails this maddeningly enigmatic character. He's as tough as Alan Ladd in '49, as suave as Redford in '74, but also vulnerable, touching, funny, a faker, a human. You hear it all in Gatsby's favorite phrase, "old sport," a verbal tic that stumped other actors. It's a tremendous, hard-won performance." Matt Zoller Seitz of "Roger Ebert.com" described his performance as Gatsby as "The movie's greatest and simplest special effect," and states "This is an iconic performance — maybe his career best." The film grossed $348 million worldwide and became Luhrmann's highest-grossing film.

DiCaprio reunited with Scorsese for the fifth time in "The Wolf of Wall Street", a film based on the life of stockbroker Jordan Belfort, who was arrested in the late 1990s for securities fraud and money laundering. Filming began on August 8, 2012, in New York, and the film was released on December 25, 2013. The role earned him a Golden Globe Award for Best Actor in a Musical or Comedy and his fourth Academy Award nomination for acting. In January 2013, DiCaprio said he was going to take a long break from acting and would "fly around the world doing good for the environment."

In 2015, DiCaprio played fur trapper Hugh Glass in the survival drama "The Revenant", directed by Alejandro G. Iñárritu. The film was well received by critics and DiCaprio's performance garnered universal acclaim that earned him numerous awards, including his first win at the Academy Awards in the Best Actor category, his eleventh nomination and third win at Golden Globes in the Best Actor Drama category, and his first BAFTA award for Best Actor.

On August 10, 2015, it was announced that Martin Scorsese will direct an adaptation of Erik Larson's "The Devil in the White City", which will star DiCaprio with a screenplay to be written by Billy Ray. In October 2015, Appian Way acquired the movie rights for a book about the Volkswagen emissions scandal. On October 21, 2016, it was announced that DiCaprio will portray Sam Phillips, founder of Memphis-based Sun Studio, in the forthcoming film based on Peter Guralnick's book "Sam Phillips: The Man Who Invented Rock ‘N’ Roll". In 2017, Paramount announced that it has acquired the movie rights for an English language adaptation of "The Black Hand". The new film, due for release in 2018, will star DiCaprio as Joe Petrosino, and will be partly based on Stephan Talty's novelization of Petrosino's assassination. In August 2017, Paramount won a bidding war against Universal Pictures for the rights to adapt Walter Isaacson's biography of Leonardo da Vinci. The studio bought the rights under its deal with DiCaprio's Appian Way Productions, which said that it planned to produce the film with DiCaprio as the star. As of September 2017, DiCaprio is set to star in "Roosevelt," a biopic of former U.S. President Theodore Roosevelt; Martin Scorsese will direct and Paramount Pictures will distribute, with DiCaprio's Appian Way producing. The film does not yet have a release date. In January 2018, it was announced that DiCaprio is planned to star in Quentin Tarantino's upcoming film about the Manson Family murders.

DiCaprio's romantic relationships have been widely covered in the media. In 1997 DiCaprio dated the British singer Emma Bunton. He also dated the actress Bijou Phillips and the models Kristen Zang and Emma Miller. In 2000, he met Brazilian model Gisele Bündchen, whom he dated until 2005. He was romantically involved with Israeli model Bar Refaeli from 2005 to 2011, during which time he met with Israeli president Shimon Peres and visited Refaeli's hometown of Hod HaSharon.

DiCaprio owns a home in Los Angeles and an apartment in Battery Park City, New York. In 2009, he bought an island off mainland Belize, on which he is planning to create an eco-friendly resort. In 2014, he purchased the original Dinah Shore residence designed by mid-century modern architect Donald Wexler in Palm Springs, California.

In 2005, DiCaprio's face was severely injured when model Aretha Wilson hit him over the head with a broken bottle at a Hollywood party. After pleading guilty in 2010, Wilson was sentenced to prison for two years.

During the 2004 presidential election, DiCaprio campaigned and donated to John Kerry's presidential bid. The FEC showed that DiCaprio gave $2,300 to Barack Obama's presidential campaign in the 2008 election, the maximum contribution an individual could give in that election cycle, and $5,000 to Obama's 2012 campaign.

DiCaprio is agnostic.

Following the success of "Titanic" in 1997 along with earlier films, 24-year-old DiCaprio established the Leonardo DiCaprio Foundation in 1998, a non-profit organization devoted to promoting environmental awareness. Although concerned with all areas of the environment, it focuses on global warming, preserving Earth's biodiversity and supporting renewable energy. It has worked on projects in over 40 countries and has produced two short web documentaries, "Water Planet" and "Global Warning." The foundation has also funded debt-for-nature swaps.

Because of his active involvement in those causes, he has received praise from environmental groups. Among the accolades received were the Martin Litton Environment Award, in 2001, from Environment Now, and the Environmental Leadership Award in 2003 from Global Green USA.

DiCaprio chaired the national Earth Day celebration in 2000, where he interviewed President Bill Clinton and they discussed plans to deal with global warming and the environment. In 2007 he had a major role in "The 11th Hour", a documentary about people's relationship to nature and global warming. He co-produced, co-wrote and narrated the film. From a benefit "11th Hour" fine art auction he organized in 2013, he raised nearly $40 million to toward his foundation. He told attendees, "Bid as if the fate of the planet depended on us." It became the world's highest-grossing environmental charity event ever held. DiCaprio states that global warming is the world's "number-one environmental challenge".

In July 2016 his foundation awarded $15.6 million to help protect wildlife and the rights of Native Americans, along with combating climate change. And in July 2017, a charity auction and celebrity concert put on by the foundation had raised over $30 million in its opening days and was set to continue the following month.
He has been an active supporter of numerous environmental organizations and has sat on the board of the World Wildlife Fund, Global Green USA, International Fund for Animal Welfare and the Natural Resources Defense Council. He traveled to Indonesia in early 2016 where he criticized the government's palm oil industry's slash-and-burn forest clearing methods.

At the 2007 Oscar ceremony, DiCaprio and former Vice President Al Gore appeared to announce that the Academy Awards had incorporated environmentally intelligent practices in its production. He presented at the 2007 American leg of Live Earth, and in 2010 his environmental work earned DiCaprio a nomination for the VH1 Do Something Award, honoring people who do good. In 2014 he was appointed as a United Nations representative on climate change, and later that year he made an opening statement to members of the UN Climate Summit. He again spoke at the UN in April 2016 prior to the signing of Paris Climate Change Agreement.

DiCaprio is a vegetarian, rumored to even be vegan, and in 2014 he backed the documentary Cowspiracy about the impact of animal agriculture on the environment and the positions of several environmental organizations on the issue. By taking the role of executive producer, DiCaprio helped the documentary get released on Netflix.

He also executive-produced and appeared in "Before the Flood", a 2016 documentary film examining various aspects of global warming.

In accepting his Best Actor award at the 2016 Oscars ceremony, DiCaprio stated:

DiCaprio has owned environment-friendly electric-hybrid vehicles and his home is powered by solar panels, although his use of private jets and large yachts has attracted criticism due to their large carbon footprints.

In November 2010, DiCaprio donated $1 million to the Wildlife Conservation Society at Russia's tiger summit. DiCaprio's persistence in reaching the event after encountering two plane delays caused then Prime Minister Vladimir Putin to describe him as a "muzhik" or "real man". In 2011, DiCaprio joined the Animal Legal Defense Fund's campaign to free Tony, a tiger who has spent the last decade at the Tiger Truck Stop in Grosse Tête, Louisiana.

In early 2016, at a meeting with Pope Francis, he gave a charity donation and spoke about environmental issues. A few days later, possibly influenced by his meeting with DiCaprio, the Pope said he would act in a planned faith-based charity film, "Beyond the Sun". It would be his first acting experience, and would also be the first time in history that a Pope appeared in a feature film. Profits from the film would be given to charities in Argentina.

In October 2016, DiCaprio joined forces with Mark Ruffalo in North Dakota in support of the Standing Rock tribe’s opposition to the Dakota Access Pipeline.

In April 2017, he promoted and protested President Trump's inaction on climate change by attending the 2017 People's Climate March.Leonardo DiCaprio is identified as one of the most active celebrities in the climate change movement. Not only did he highlight the topic at the Oscars but he is a constant source of information on the matter.Many political figures welcome high-profile influencers such as actors as Leonardo DiCaprio or artists to address political causes, environmental or not, “because of the high recognition that celebrities have”, states Eric T. Kasper, an associate professor of political science. He claims that much of the public feel a personal connection to the stars after experiencing emotion from them in so many different ways on the big screens. While budgets in the science and technology sector are declining as well as interest in newspapers and scientific journal series, it is important to have more familiar faces and voices such of those from celebrities to represent the importance of subjects such as climate change.

In 1998, DiCaprio and his mother donated $35,000 for a "Leonardo DiCaprio Computer Center" at the Los Feliz branch of the Los Angeles Public Library, the site of his childhood home. It was rebuilt after the 1994 Northridge earthquake and opened in early 1999. During the filming of "Blood Diamond", DiCaprio worked with 24 orphaned children from the SOS Children's Village in Maputo, Mozambique, and was said to be extremely touched by his interactions with the children. In 2010, he donated $1 million to relief efforts in Haiti after the earthquake.

In April 2013, DiCaprio donated $61,000 to GLAAD, an organization which promotes the image of LGBT people in the media.




</doc>
<doc id="7028414" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7028414" title="Eddie Redmayne">
Eddie Redmayne

Edward John David Redmayne, (; born 6 January 1982) is an English actor of stage and screen. Born and raised in London, he studied history of art at Trinity College, Cambridge, after which he briefly dabbled with a modelling career. 

Redmayne began his professional acting career as a youth in West End theatre, before making his screen debut in 1998 with guest appearances on television. His first film roles came in 2006 with "Like Minds" and "The Good Shepherd", and he went on to play supporting roles in several films, including "Savage Grace" (2007), "" (2007), "The Other Boleyn Girl" (2008), and "Sodor's Legend of the Lost Treasure" (2015).

Redmayne also starred in the stage productions of "Red" from 2009 to 2010 and "Richard II" from 2011 to 2012. The former won him the Tony Award for Best Featured Actor in a Play. His film breakthrough came with the roles of Colin Clark in the biographical drama "My Week with Marilyn" (2011) and Marius Pontmercy in Tom Hooper's musical "Les Misérables" (2012). 

In 2014, Redmayne portrayed English physicist Stephen Hawking in "The Theory of Everything", winning an Academy Award, a Golden Globe Award and a BAFTA Award for Best Actor. The following year, he played Lili Elbe, one of the first known recipients of sex reassignment surgery, in Hooper's "The Danish Girl", which saw him nominated for Best Actor in the three aforementioned awards. In 2016, he starred as Newt Scamander in the fantasy film "Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them".

Redmayne was born on 6 January 1982 in London. His mother, Patricia (née Burke), runs a relocation business, and his father, Richard Redmayne, is a businessman in corporate finance. His paternal great-grandfather was Sir Richard Redmayne, a civil and mining engineer. He has an older brother, a younger brother, and an older half-brother and half-sister. From the age of 10, Redmayne attended Jackie Palmer Stage School, where he found his love for acting and singing, alongside fellow star James Corden. 

He attended Eaton House, Colet Court, and then Eton College, where he was in the same year as Prince William. He went on to read History of Art at Trinity College, Cambridge, from where he graduated with 2:1 Honours in 2003. Despite being colourblind, Redmayne wrote his dissertation on Yves Klein's signature colour, International Klein Blue.

Prior to becoming a full-time actor, Redmayne modelled for Burberry in 2008 with Alex Pettyfer, and in 2012 with Cara Delevigne. In the September 2012 issue of "Vanity Fair", he was featured on its annual International Best Dressed List. In 2015, he was named number one in GQ's 50 best dressed British men.

Redmayne made his professional stage debut as Viola in "Twelfth Night", for Shakespeare's Globe at the Middle Temple Hall in 2002. He won the award for Outstanding Newcomer at the 50th "Evening Standard" Theatre Awards in 2004, for his performance in Edward Albee's "The Goat, or Who Is Sylvia?", and the award for Best Newcomer at the Critics' Circle Theatre Awards in 2005. Later stage credits include "Now or Later" by Christopher Shinn at the Royal Court Theatre. The show ran from 3 September to 1 November 2008.

In 2009, Redmayne appeared in John Logan's new play "Red" at the Donmar Warehouse in London, for which he won the 2010 Olivier Award for Best Actor in a Supporting Role. He reprised his role in "Red" at the John Golden Theatre on Broadway, in a 15-week run from 11 March to 27 June 2010, and won the 2010 Tony Award for Best Performance by a Featured Actor in a Play. He portrayed King Richard II in "Richard II" directed by Michael Grandage, at the Donmar Warehouse from 6 December 2011 to 4 February 2012.

Redmayne was cast in his first feature film "Like Minds" (2006) after being spotted by casting director Lucy Bevan performing in a play called "Goats". Redmayne has appeared in films such as "The Good Shepherd" (2006), "Savage Grace" (2007), "Powder Blue" (2008), "The Other Boleyn Girl" (2008), "Glorious 39" (2009), and "Hick" (2011). He starred as Osmund in Christopher Smith's supernatural gothic chiller film "Black Death" (2010). His 2008 Sundance drama film "The Yellow Handkerchief" was released on 26 February 2010 by Samuel Goldwyn Films.

He starred as filmmaker Colin Clark in the drama film "My Week with Marilyn" (2011). He took on the role of Marius Pontmercy for the 2012 musical film "Les Misérables".

In 2014, he starred as Stephen Hawking in "The Theory of Everything", a role for which he won the Academy Award, BAFTA, Golden Globe, and Screen Actors Guild Award for Best Actor, depicting the debilitating challenges of ALS.

In early 2015, Redmayne appeared in the Wachowski siblings' film, "Jupiter Ascending" as Balem Abrasax. The film was widely panned, including his performance, for which he won the Golden Raspberry Award for Worst Supporting Actor in the same year that he was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Actor for "The Danish Girl". Redmayne guest starred as Ryan the tank engine in "Thomas & Friends" movie special "Sodor's Legend of the Lost Treasure."

Redmayne made his screen debut in 1998 in an episode of "Animal Ark". His television credits include the BBC miniseries "Tess of the d'Urbervilles", the miniseries "The Pillars of the Earth", and the two-part miniseries "Birdsong".

In June 2015, it was announced that Redmayne would star as Newt Scamander in the film adaptation of "Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them", a spin-off from the "Harry Potter" film series, with a screenplay by J. K. Rowling. Redmayne presented the 2015 documentary War Art with Eddie Redmayne, made as part of the ITV’s Perspectives (TV series) strand.

Redmayne starred in the biographical drama "The Danish Girl", directed by Academy Award-winning director Tom Hooper. In the film, released in the United Kingdom on 1 January 2016, Redmayne portrayed transgender pioneer Lili Elbe, a casting that was the subject of some controversy from the transgender community. However, Redmayne's performance was met with critical acclaim, and in January 2016, he earned his second nomination for the Academy Award for Best Actor in consecutive years.

Redmayne married Hannah Bagshawe, a public relations executive, on 15 December 2014. Their daughter Iris Mary Redmayne was born in June 2016.

Redmayne was appointed Officer of the Order of the British Empire (OBE) in the 2015 Birthday Honours for services to drama. In August 2014, he was appointed ambassador of film education charity Into Film.

In February 2016, Redmayne spoke out for homeless LGBT youth in Los Angeles.



</doc>
<doc id="689839" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=689839" title="Casey Affleck">
Casey Affleck

Caleb Casey McGuire Affleck-Boldt (born August 12, 1975) is an American actor and director. He began his career as a child actor, appearing in the PBS television film "Lemon Sky" (1988) and the ABC miniseries "The Kennedys of Massachusetts" (1990). He later appeared in three Gus Van Sant films – "To Die For" (1995), "Good Will Hunting" (1997), and "Gerry" (2002) – and in Steven Soderbergh's comedy heist trilogy "Ocean's Eleven" (2001), "Ocean's Twelve" (2004), and "Ocean's Thirteen" (2007). His first leading role was in Steve Buscemi's independent comedy-drama "Lonesome Jim" (2006).

Affleck's breakthrough was in 2007, when he was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor for his performance in the western drama "The Assassination of Jesse James by the Coward Robert Ford" and acted in the crime drama "Gone Baby Gone", directed by his brother Ben Affleck. In 2010, he directed the mockumentary "I'm Still Here". He then had a string of successful films in the early 2010s with "Tower Heist", "ParaNorman", and "Interstellar", and received particular praise for his performance as an outlaw in the indie film "Ain't Them Bodies Saints". 

In 2016, Affleck starred as the lead in the drama film "Manchester by the Sea". For his performance as Lee Chandler, a grief-stricken man, he won the Golden Globe, BAFTA and Academy Award for Best Actor, and received a Screen Actors Guild Award nomination. In 2017, Affleck received critical acclaim for his leading role in the supernatural drama film "A" "Ghost" "Story".

Caleb Casey McGuire Affleck-Boldt was born on August 12, 1975 in Falmouth, Massachusetts, to Christopher Anne "Chris" (née Boldt) and Timothy Byers Affleck. The surname "Affleck" is of Scottish origin. He also has Irish, German, English, and Swiss ancestry. His mother was a Radcliffe College– and Harvard–educated elementary school teacher. His father worked sporadically as an auto mechanic, a carpenter, a bookie, an electrician, a bartender, and a janitor at Harvard University. In the mid-1960s, he had been a stage manager, director, writer and actor with the Theater Company of Boston.

During Affleck's childhood, his father was "a disaster of a drinker", and his first experience of acting was "reenacting what was happening at home" during role play exercises at Alateen meetings. Following his parents' divorce when he was nine, Affleck and his older brother, Ben, lived with their mother and visited their father weekly. He learned to speak Spanish during a year spent travelling around Mexico with his mother and brother when he was 10. The two siblings spent "all of our time together, pretty much. Obviously at school we were in different grades, but we had the same friends." When Affleck was 14, his father moved to Indio, California to enter a rehabilitation facility, and later worked there as an addiction counselor. Affleck reconnected with his father during visits to California as a teenager: "I got to know him, really, because he was sober for the first time ... The man I knew before that was just completely different."

Growing up in a politically active, liberal household in Central Square, Cambridge, Affleck and his brother were surrounded by people who worked in the arts, were regularly taken to the theater by their mother, and were encouraged to make their own home movies. The brothers sometimes appeared in local weather commercials and as movie extras because of their mother's friendship with a local casting director. Affleck acted in numerous high school theater productions while a student at Cambridge Rindge and Latin School. He has said he "wouldn't be an actor" if not for his high school theater teacher Gerry Speca: "He kind of turned me on to acting, why it can be fun, how it can be rewarding."

At the age of 18, Affleck moved to Los Angeles for a year to pursue an acting career, and lived with his brother and their childhood friend Matt Damon. Despite having "the best possible first experience" while filming "To Die For", he spent much of the year working as a busboy at a restaurant in Pasadena and decided to move to Washington, D.C. to study politics at George Washington University. He soon transferred to Columbia University in New York City, where he followed the core curriculum for a total of two years. However, he did not graduate: "I would do a semester of school, go do a movie ... Opportunities kept presenting themselves that were hard for me to turn down ... By then, I didn't really have roots at the school or a group of friends."

Affleck acted professionally during his childhood due to his mother's friendship with a Cambridge-area casting director, Patty Collinge. In addition to local weather commercials and movie extra work, he appeared as Kevin Bacon's brother in the PBS television movie "Lemon Sky" (1988), directed by Collinge's husband Jan Egleson, and as a young Robert Kennedy in the ABC miniseries "The Kennedys of Massachusetts" (1990). These early acting experiences "meant nothing more than a day off from school" to Affleck, and he only began to consider a career as an actor when in high school. When he later moved to Los Angeles to pursue an acting career in earnest, his first movie role was as a sociopathic teenager in Gus Van Sant's 1995 satirical comedy "To Die For". During filming in Toronto, Affleck shared an apartment with co-star Joaquin Phoenix and they became close friends. Peter Travers of "Rolling Stone" praised Affleck's performance, saying he "skillfully capture[s] the pang of adolescence among no-hopers." However, Affleck then had a "disappointing" experience while making the 1996 drama "Race the Sun" and, "as soon as the film finished, I went to school."

While studying at Columbia University, Affleck had a supporting role in Van Sant's "Good Will Hunting" (1997), written by his brother and their childhood friend Matt Damon. Despite arranging a first meeting between Van Sant and his brother to discuss the project, Affleck was reluctant to leave college temporarily to act in the film. He was eventually persuaded to play one of four friends living in South Boston – a role written specifically for him – and improvised many of his lines. Jay Carr of "The Boston Globe" praised the "emotional subtleties and variety" of the performances, and singled out "Casey Affleck's junior member of the quartet, dying to be taken as seriously as the others." Following the critical and commercial success of the movie, Affleck's career opportunities did not significantly improve despite parts of his life becoming "part of pop culture and public life." Also in 1997, he had a small role in Kevin Smith's "Chasing Amy", starring his brother. He returned to university for a semester before quitting to focus on his acting career.

Affleck's career then entered a "dark" period, with a series of supporting roles in critical and commercial failures. He later remarked: "It dawned on me late that I should be selective about what I do." In the independent comedy "Desert Blue" (1998), he starred opposite Kate Hudson as a small-town jock. Peter Stack of the "San Francisco Chronicle" felt that, while "interesting", his character was "entirely underdeveloped". In 1999, he made an uncredited cameo in the teen comedy "American Pie" and appeared as a punk rocker romantically involved with both Gaby Hoffman and Christina Ricci's characters in the New Year's Eve ensemble comedy "200 Cigarettes". In the comedy "Drowning Mona" (2000), starring Danny DeVito, Affleck played a shy gardener suspected of murder. Elvis Mitchell of "The New York Times" acknowledged, in an otherwise negative review, that his role was "well played". Also in 2000, he had a small role in the comedy "Attention Shoppers" and played Fortinbras in Ethan Hawke's "Hamlet". He then appeared as the brother of Heather Graham's character in the romantic comedy "Committed" (2001), with Emanuel Levy of "Variety" praising a "terrific" performance. Also in 2001, he had a small role in "American Pie 2" and appeared in the teen slasher film "Soul Survivors". Robert Koehler of "Variety" found him "bland" while Carla Meyer of the "San Francisco Chronicle" said that he did not make "much of an impression, [but may] have been too depressed to really act." One positive experience Affleck had during this period was working with Van Sant and cinematographer Harris Savides on "Finding Forrester" (2000) as Van Sant's assistant and technical consultant: "Can you imagine a better film school that that? Gus is not only somebody who I love a lot but is also who has taught me, maybe more than anybody else in film."

Affleck found a degree of commercial success when he was cast in Steven Soderbergh's heist comedy "Ocean's Eleven" (2001), starring George Clooney, Brad Pitt and Damon. In roles Soderbergh originally intended for Luke Wilson and Owen Wilson, Affleck and Scott Caan played Mormon brothers and wisecracking mechanics who help to rob three Las Vegas casinos simultaneously. While it was a "great, fun social experience," Affleck spent much of his time on set "being, like, 100 feet away from the camera in the background." He would later reprise his role in "Ocean's Twelve" (2004) and "Ocean's Thirteen" (2007). In 2002, Affleck and Damon starred in Van Sant's experimental drama "Gerry", playing two men who get lost while hiking in the desert. Affleck, Damon and Van Sant conceived of the idea and wrote the screenplay together while living in neighbouring New York apartments. The film, which had minimal dialogue, received mixed reviews. Affleck, who rarely watches his own movies, said of "Gerry" in 2016: "That was an incredible experience. I saw one scene recently out of context at the Telluride Film Festival and I can't believe anyone ever sat through the whole thing. It probably works better as a whole but one scene lifted out – I thought, 'This is unbearable!'" Also in 2002, Affleck starred with Damon and then-girlfriend Summer Phoenix in a West End stage production of Kenneth Lonergan's "This Is Our Youth". Lonergan and Affleck became friends during rehearsals, and Affleck later acted in workshop productions of Lonergan's plays in New York.

Affleck's first leading role was in 2006's little-seen independent comedy-drama "Lonesome Jim", directed by Steve Buscemi. He played a depressed writer who returns from New York to live with his parents in Indiana, and begins a relationship with Liv Tyler's character. Buscemi has said he knew Affleck would be able to carry the movie after watching his performance in "Gerry". Stephen Hunter of the "Washington Post" remarked: "Affleck's interesting .. He probably can't be a star in big movies because his drawback is a voice that sounds like a snivel drawn through a wet nasal passage into a whine ... And yet in certain kinds of films – this kind – he's 100 percent authentic." Ty Burr of the "Boston Globe" said Affleck "gets so far under the skin of this semi-charming jerk that the performance becomes both brave and aggravating." However, Stephen Holden of "The New York Times" felt it "would be a stronger movie if Mr. Affleck had the wherewithal to bare more of the passive-aggressive rage inside ... a more resourceful actor would have used this blank slate to scrawl a thousand telling details." Also in 2006, he had a supporting role in the romantic comedy "The Last Kiss" as a friend of Zach Braff's character.

Affleck had a breakthrough year in 2007, with the release of two films featuring critically acclaimed performances. The first of these performances was in the Western drama "The Assassination of Jesse James by the Coward Robert Ford", in which he played Robert Ford to Brad Pitt's Jesse James. Affleck auditioned repeatedly for the role. While the director Andrew Dominik had seen Affleck in "Gerry", he cast him partly because of his "beautiful-sounding voice. The voice is the thing that really gets you." Manohla Dargis of "The New York Times" described Affleck's performance as a "revelation" which "manages to make the character seem dumb and the actor wily and smart." Similarly, Claudia Puig of "USA Today" declared him a "real revelation [who] perfectly inhabits the role" while Todd McCarthy of "Variety" said Affleck made "an indelible impression as the insecure, physically unprepossessing weakling." Dana Stevens of "Slate" said "the movie belongs to Affleck [who] goes for broke in a wonderfully brave and weird performance as the craven naif Bob. Somehow he makes us want to flee this creep at top speed, even as we pray no harm will come to him." For his performance, Affleck was nominated for the Golden Globe Award, Screen Actors Guild Award and Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor.

While he was filming "The Assassination of Jesse James by the Coward Robert Ford" in Calgary, Affleck was visited by his brother who offered him the leading role in his directorial project, the Boston crime thriller "Gone Baby Gone" (2007). While his brother was a first-time director and in the midst of a career downturn, Affleck had confidence in the project: "I felt like I knew him better than anyone else did." His performance, as an inexperienced private investigator tasked with finding a missing child, earned Affleck further plaudits for his acting. Manohla Dargis of "The New York Times" said: "I'm not sure exactly when Casey Affleck became such a good actor ... Most actors want you to love them, but [he] doesn't seem to know that, or maybe he doesn't care." Jim Ridley of "The Village Voice" described him as "a major talent coming into his own" while Mick LaSalle of the "San Francisco Chronicle" remarked that "the revelation is Casey Affleck, who heretofore has been a rather wormy, uncharismatic screen presence." Ty Burr of "The Boston Globe" commented: "I'd never stopped to consider Casey Affleck as a movie star before, but under his big brother's tutelage, he blooms as a leading man of richly watchable savvy and intelligence."

While "The Assassination of Jesse James by the Coward Robert Ford" and "Gone Baby Gone" were a financial failure and a modest box office success respectively, Affleck's acting career was widely believed to be at a turning point. However, he lost career momentum while directing "I'm Still Here" (2010), a divisive mockumentary about the musical career of his friend and then brother-in-law Joaquin Phoenix. While Affleck later clarified that it was "a planned, staged and scripted work of fiction," there was much media speculation during filming about whether Phoenix's public behaviour was performance art or a genuine breakdown. Claudia Puig of "USA Today" remarked that, "whether truth or folly, it's not particularly well made. Even in the midst of Phoenix's most oddball and obsessive torment, it's boring ... What, exactly, is the point of a joke that nobody really gets?" Ty Burr of "The Boston Globe" described it as "an interesting but half-baked exercise in persona deconstruction, celebrity politics, and meta-meta-entertainment ... Parts of it are close to genius; most of it is actively torturous to watch." Kenneth Turan of the "Los Angeles Times" said the film "turns out to be much more interesting to speculate about than to actually watch." Reflecting on the experience in 2016, Affleck said: "We never thought people would actually think it was real ... In hindsight, we should have had a press junket and done talk shows and said how it was a mockumentary."

Affleck used his own money to fund "I'm Still Here" and, after running out of cash, filming was paused for a month to allow him to play a Texan serial killer in Michael Winterbottom's crime drama "The Killer Inside Me" (2010). Affleck later expressed regret over the movie's graphic violence. Philip French of "The Guardian" found him "disturbingly brilliant" while Peter Travers of "Rolling Stone" praised "a mesmeric, implosively powerful performance." Mark Olsen of the "Los Angeles Times" said Affleck "showcases his uncanny ability to project a person holding two thoughts in his head at once, as he often gives away nothing in his face to convey the firestorm obviously raging in his soul." Affleck then had a supporting role in the heist comedy "Tower Heist" (2011) and voiced a character in the 2012 animation "ParaNorman".

After spending "a big chunk of time" directing "I'm Still Here" and dealing with the subsequent backlash, Affleck returned to regular acting work in 2013. "It was ugly for a minute ... I sort of remembered why I liked acting and I missed it." In David Lowery's "Ain't Them Bodies Saints" (2013), Affleck and Rooney Mara starred as outlaw lovers in 1970s-era Texas. Affleck was drawn to the opportunity to play a character who "was a much better person than anyone thought," after a string of roles as "assassins or murderers or just creeps." Shannon M. Houston of "Paste Magazine" described him as the movie's "standout actor": "Down to his very jawline, Affleck captures the physicality and feeling of a sincerely romantic outlaw." Betsy Sharkey of the "Los Angeles Times" remarked: "Affleck plays conflicted souls so very well ... Here you wish for a criminal's redemption." Michael Phillips of the "Chicago Tribune" said: "He has great instincts when it comes to morally compromised anti-heroes, and without trolling for our sympathy, Affleck's Bob is more than just a collection of behaviors; it's a smartly considered performance." Sebastian Doggart of "The Guardian" said he "shows himself again to be a master of the criminal outsider" while Chuck Wilson of "The Village Voice" found him "flat-out heartbreaking."

The opportunity to act opposite Christian Bale in the drama "Out of the Furnace" "reinvigorated" Affleck and reminded him why he enjoyed acting. Claudia Puig of "USA Today" found his performance as an Iraq War veteran dealing with posttraumatic stress disorder "completely captivating ... The chemistry between Bale and Affleck is powerful, intensifying the credibility of their brotherly bond." Michael Phillips of the "Chicago Tribune" said Affleck "finds something fierce and noble in uneven material and in his character's rage. He's not like any other actor in American movies." Ann Hornaday of "The Washington Post" described the performance as "a searing portrayal of a young man who pushes himself to the punishing physical limit in search of both money and catharsis." Manohla Dargis of "The New York Times" remarked that Affleck "can come across as intensely vulnerable on screen, which nicely works for a broken man like Rodney." In 2014, Affleck and Jessica Chastain had supporting roles in Christopher Nolan's science fiction film "Interstellar" as the grown-up children of Matthew McConaughey's character, with Todd McCarthy of "The Hollywood Reporter" describing his character as "thinly developed". Also in 2014, Affleck and producer John Powers Middleton launched the production company, The Affleck/Middleton Project.

Affleck starred in three films in 2016, the first two of which underperformed financially. In John Hillcoat's crime thriller "Triple 9", Affleck played an uncorruptible detective. Mick LaSalle of the "San Francisco Chronicle" said he "arrests our attention. I wonder if any other screen actor has ever seemed so focused and so distracted at the same time. He thinks more than he says, and so we listen, trying to get the part he's leaving out." Justin Chang of "Variety" described him as "one of the most persuasive leading men of his generation" while Brogan Morris of "Paste Magazine" declared him "maybe Hollywood's best offbeat leading man ... Few actors can suggest so much with such quiet precision, and even here Affleck is compulsively watchable despite his undercooked character." In Disney's disaster drama "The Finest Hours", Affleck played a taciturn engineer on board a sinking ship. David Sims of "The Atlantic" said he "gives the kind of measured, thought-out performance he's so eminently capable of, even if the film isn't complex enough to rise to his level ... He animates an introverted character with subtle mental busywork whenever he's on the screen." Sheri Linden of "The Hollywood Reporter" noted that he "manages to turn his man of few words into the movie's most compelling figure."

In his final role of 2016, Affleck starred as Lee Chandler, a grief-stricken alcoholic loner, in Kenneth Lonergan's drama "Manchester by the Sea". One of the film's producers, Matt Damon, initially intended to star in the film. When scheduling conflicts made this unfeasible, Damon agreed to step aside on the condition that he be replaced with Affleck. Lonergan readily agreed, remarking that Affleck was "the natural person to go to." Affleck had close relationships with both men and had previously offered notes on early drafts of the script. The movie was a box office success, and Affleck's performance received widespread critical praise. A.O. Scott of "The New York Times" described it as "one of the most fiercely disciplined screen performances in recent memory. [He] conveys both Lee's inner avalanche of feeling and the numb decorum that holds it back." Kenneth Turan of the "Los Angeles Times" praised his "quietly ferocious performance, his willingness to submerge himself into this character to an almost frightening extent." Ann Hornaday of "The Washington Post" said the film was "anchored by a quietly volcanic central performance by Casey Affleck, in a breathtaking breakout role he's long deserved." David Fear of "Rolling Stone" stated: "He's given impressive turns before [but] the way Affleck gradually shows you the man's bone-deep grief and emotional damage makes you believe that one of this generation's finest actors has simply been waiting to be coaxed out." Affleck won the National Board of Review, Critics' Choice, Golden Globe, BAFTA, and Academy Award for his performance.

After dropping out of Lowery's "Pete's Dragon" in order to star in "Manchester by the Sea", Affleck reteamed with the director to star opposite Rooney Mara in the experimental drama "A Ghost Story", which premiered at the Sundance Film Festival in early 2017. Affleck's character dies suddenly at the outset and he spends much of the film covered by a white sheet with two eye-holes, haunting his former home. David Rooney of "The Hollywood Reporter" said Affleck's performance managed to resonate despite limited time onscreen. Peter Debruge of "Variety" said Affleck "has never been an easy actor to read. He's a low-charisma mumbler who tends to keep his characters' emotions bottled up, making him the rare performer who can convey as much with a sheet over his head as he does without." Jordan Hoffman of "The Guardian" described him as "cinema's finest mumbler ... I can't even tell if he's speaking or just emitting high-pitched vibrations anymore." He directed, wrote and starred in the survival drama "Light of My Life"; it is awaiting a release date. In early 2017, Affleck will film his third collaboration with Lowery, this time opposite Robert Redford in the outlaw drama "The Old Man and the Gun". Affleck also intends to direct the Western "Far Bright Star", starring Joaquin Phoenix.

Affleck was introduced to actress Summer Phoenix by her brother, Joaquin, in the mid-1990s. They began dating in 1999, and acted together in both the 2000 film "Committed" and a 2002 stage production of "This is Our Youth". The couple became engaged in January 2004 and married on June 3, 2006 in Savannah, Georgia. They have two sons, Indiana August (b. May 2004) and Atticus (b. December 2007). By early 2015, they had privately separated. They publicly announced their separation in March 2016. Affleck later said: "She's the best. We're very good friends and I love her." In 2016, Affleck began dating actress Floriana Lima. On August 1, 2017, Summer Phoenix officially filed a petition for divorce with the Superior Court of California in Los Angeles, citing "irreconcilable differences." The divorce was finalized in 2017.

In a 2016 interview, Affleck said that he had been sober for "almost three years ... My father was a disaster of a drinker, my grandmother was an alcoholic, my brother spent some time in rehab – it's in our genes."

In 2008, Affleck filmed an episode of documentary series "4Real", in which he visited the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma, and remarked upon the progress they had made due largely to "their own resourcefulness and determination and their character, and not because of the goodness of our collective heart." During the 2016 presidential campaign, Affleck supported Hillary Clinton and characterized Donald Trump as "a dangerous fool." In 2017, multiple financial contributions to Trump were made by Affleck's production company, which he co-founded with John Powers Middleton. In a statement, Affleck denied involvement: "I had no knowledge of it, was never asked, and never would have authorized it ... The policies of the Trump administration, and the values they represent, are antithetical to everything I believe in."

In 2010, two of his former co-workers from "I'm Still Here" filed civil lawsuits against Affleck. Amanda White, one of the film's producers, sued Affleck for $2 million with multiple complaints including "sexual harassment" and "breach of oral contract". She detailed numerous "uninvited and unwelcome sexual advances" in the workplace, alleging that Affleck had instructed Spacehog guitarist Antony Langdon to expose himself in her presence, spoke "inappropriately" about her advancing age and fertility, discussed his "sexual exploits", referred to women as "cows", invaded her "personal space" by locking her out of her hotel room while entertaining another woman, attempted to "manipulate" her into staying with him in a hotel room, "violently" grabbed her by the arm when she refused and sent her "abusive text messages" for refusing to stay with him. White alleged that Affleck refused to honor the terms of the production agreement, including her fee, in retaliation. The film's cinematographer, Magdalena Gorka, sued Affleck for $2.25 million with multiple complaints including "intentional infliction of emotional distress" and "breach of oral contract". Gorka alleged that she had been subjected to "routine instances" of sexual harassment by crew members including Langdon, "within the presence and with the active encouragement of Affleck." While staying in Joaquin Phoenix's apartment during filming, Phoenix offered Gorka the private use of his bedroom. Affleck allegedly joined Gorka in bed while she slept, wearing only "his underwear and a t-shirt ... He had his arm around her, was caressing her back, his face was within inches of hers and his breath reeked of alcohol." She claimed that Affleck later berated and verbally attacked her for refusing his advances, and that she was forced to resign because of harassment and abuse.

Affleck denied the allegations and threatened to countersue; his lawyer described both claims as "total fiction" and "completely fabricated." His lawyer claimed, "Both women left the film in April 2009 and both were refused when they wanted to return," and "there was no mention of sexual harassment before June [2010]." In his response to White's lawsuit, Affleck alleged that she had engaged in "extortionate tactics" since 2009, by refusing to hand over "key production documents" and trying to block the release of the film, in an effort to obtain more compensation for her work than she was "legally entitled to." Affleck also submitted a number of email exchanges with White, in which she wrote "I am really happy to be a part of this project. I do enjoy working with you..." "All the best to you and your family." The film's associate producer Nicole Acacio and an unnamed female editor both defended Affleck's conduct on set, saying that "I never saw anything out of the ordinary either on or off set," and "nothing I've ever witnessed would lead me to think he could ever do anything like that." The lawsuits were later settled out of court and dismissed. Both women received credit for their work on the project; no details of any financial settlement were released.

Affleck addressed the allegations when speaking to "The New York Times" in 2016; he stated: "It was settled to the satisfaction of all. I was hurt and upset — I am sure all were — but I am over it. It was an unfortunate situation — mostly for the innocent bystanders of the families of those involved." When Affleck won the Best Actor Oscar, the presenter Brie Larson (who had won the Best Actress Award the previous year for playing a survivor of sexual abuse) refused to clap and simply handed him the award. Of her decision, Larson said the action "spoke for itself". He spoke out again after his Oscar win in February 2017; "I believe that any kind of mistreatment of anyone for any reason is unacceptable and abhorrent, and everyone deserves to be treated with respect in the workplace and anywhere else." Responding to some of the ongoing criticism he faced, Affleck said, "There's really nothing I can do about it. Other than live my life the way I know I live it and to speak to what my own values are and how I try to live by them all the time." Affleck pulled out of presenting the Best Actress Oscar at the 2018 ceremony.

Affleck has been a vegan since 1995. He has been involved with animal rights campaigns for both PETA and Farm Sanctuary.

The surname "Affleck" is of Scottish origin. Much of the Affleck’s ancestry is English, Irish, Scottish and German. Affleck’s maternal great-great grandfather, Heinrich Boldt, who is also known for the discovery of the Curmsun Disc, emigrated from Prussia in the late 1840s. 




</doc>
<doc id="100692" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=100692" title="Denzel Washington">
Denzel Washington

Denzel Hayes Washington Jr. (born December 28, 1954) is an American actor, director, and producer. He has received three Golden Globe awards, a Tony Award, and two Academy Awards: Best Supporting Actor for the historical war drama film "Glory" (1989) and Best Actor for his role as a corrupt cop in the crime thriller "Training Day" (2001).

Washington has received much critical acclaim for his film work since the 1980s, including his portrayals of real-life figures such as South African anti-apartheid activist Steve Biko in "Cry Freedom" (1987), Muslim minister and human rights activist Malcolm X in "Malcolm X" (1992), boxer Rubin "Hurricane" Carter in "The Hurricane" (1999), football coach Herman Boone in "Remember the Titans" (2000), poet and educator Melvin B. Tolson in "The Great Debaters" (2007), and drug kingpin Frank Lucas in "American Gangster" (2007). He has been a featured actor in the films produced by Jerry Bruckheimer and has been a frequent collaborator of directors Spike Lee, Antoine Fuqua and Tony Scott. In 2016, Washington was selected as the recipient for the Cecil B. DeMille Lifetime Achievement Award at the 73rd Golden Globe Awards.

In 2002, Washington made his directorial debut with the biographical film "Antwone Fisher". His second directorial effort was "The Great Debaters", released in 2007. Washington's third directorial effort, "Fences", in which he also starred, was released on December 16, 2016, and was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Picture.

Washington was born in Mount Vernon, New York. His father, Denzel Hayes Washington, Sr., a native of Buckingham County, Virginia, was an ordained Pentecostal minister, and also worked for the New York City Water Department and at a local department store, S. Klein. His mother, Lennis "Lynne" (née Lowe), was a beauty parlor owner and operator born in Georgia and partly raised in Harlem.
Washington attended Pennington-Grimes Elementary School in Mount Vernon until 1968. When he was 14, his parents divorced, and his mother sent him to a private preparatory school, Oakland Military Academy in New Windsor, New York. "That decision changed my life," Washington later said, "because I wouldn't have survived in the direction I was going. The guys I was hanging out with at the time, my running buddies, have now done maybe 40 years combined in the penitentiary. They were nice guys, but the streets got them." After Oakland, Washington next attended Mainland High School, a public high school in Daytona Beach, Florida, from 1970 to 1971. He was interested in attending Texas Tech University: "I grew up in the Boys Club in Mount Vernon, and we were the Red Raiders. So when I was in high school, I wanted to go to Texas Tech in Lubbock just because they were called the Red Raiders and their uniforms looked like ours." Washington earned a B.A. in Drama and Journalism from Fordham University in 1977. At Fordham, he played collegiate basketball as a guard under coach P.J. Carlesimo. After a period of indecision on which major to study and taking a semester off, Washington worked as creative arts director at an overnight summer camp, Camp Sloane YMCA in Lakeville, Connecticut. He participated in a staff talent show for the campers and a colleague suggested he try acting.

Returning to Fordham that fall with a renewed purpose, Washington enrolled at the Lincoln Center campus to study acting, and where he was given the title roles in Eugene O'Neill's "The Emperor Jones" and Shakespeare's "Othello". He then attended graduate school at the American Conservatory Theater in San Francisco, where he stayed for one year before returning to New York to begin a professional acting career.

Washington spent the summer of 1976 in St. Mary's City, Maryland, in summer stock theater performing "Wings of the Morning", the Maryland State play, which was written for him by incorporating an African-American character/narrator based loosely on the historical figure from early colonial Maryland, Mathias Da Sousa. Shortly after graduating from Fordham, Washington made his screen acting debut in the 1977 made-for-television film "Wilma", and his first Hollywood appearance in the 1981 film "Carbon Copy". He shared a 1982 Distinguished Ensemble Performance Obie Award for playing Private First Class Melvin Peterson in the Off-Broadway Negro Ensemble Company production "A Soldier's Play" which premiered November 20, 1981.

A major career break came when Washington starred as Dr. Phillip Chandler in NBC's television hospital drama "St. Elsewhere", which ran from 1982 to 1988. He was one of only a few African-American actors to appear on the series for its entire six-year run. He also appeared in several television, motion picture and stage roles, such as the films "A Soldier's Story" (1984), "Hard Lessons" (1986) and "Power" (1986). In 1987, he starred as South African anti-apartheid political activist Steven Biko in Richard Attenborough's "Cry Freedom", for which he received a nomination for the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor.

In 1989, Washington won the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor for his portrayal of a defiant, self-possessed ex-slave soldier in the film "Glory". That same year, he appeared in the film "The Mighty Quinn"; and in "For Queen and Country", where he played the conflicted and disillusioned Reuben James, a British soldier who, despite a distinguished military career, returns to a civilian life where racism and inner city life lead to vigilantism and violence.

In 1990, Washington starred as Bleek Gilliam in the Spike Lee film "Mo' Better Blues". In 1991, he starred as Demetrius Williams in the romantic drama "Mississippi Masala". Washington was reunited with Lee to play one of his most critically acclaimed roles, the title character of 1992's "Malcolm X". His performance as the black nationalist leader earned him another nomination for the Academy Award for Best Actor. The next year, he played the lawyer of a gay man with AIDS in the 1993 film "Philadelphia". During the early and mid-1990s, Washington starred in several successful thrillers, including "The Pelican Brief" and "Crimson Tide", as well as in the movie of the Shakespearean comedy "Much Ado About Nothing". In 1996, he played a U.S. Army officer who, despondent about a deadly mistake he made, investigates a female chopper commander's worthiness for the Medal of Honor in "Courage Under Fire" with Meg Ryan. In 1996, he appeared with Whitney Houston in the romantic comedy "The Preacher's Wife".

In 1998, Washington starred in Spike Lee's film "He Got Game". Washington played a father serving a six-year prison term when the prison warden offers him a temporary parole to convince his top-ranked high-school basketball player son (Ray Allen) to sign with the governor's alma mater, Big State. The film was Washington's third collaboration with Lee.

In 1999, Washington starred in "The Hurricane", a film about boxer Rubin 'Hurricane' Carter, whose conviction for triple murder was overturned after he spent almost 20 years in prison. Washington did receive a Golden Globe Award in 2000 and a Silver Bear Award at the Berlin International Film Festival for the role.

In 2000, Washington appeared in the Disney film "Remember the Titans" which grossed over $100 million in the U.S. That year, Washington also won a Golden Globe award for Best Actor in a Dramatic Movie for his work in "The Hurricane". He was the first black actor to win the award since Sidney Poitier in 1963.

Washington won an Academy Award for Best Actor for the 2001 cop thriller "Training Day", where he played Detective Alonzo Harris, a corrupt Los Angeles cop with questionable law-enforcement tactics. He was the second African-American performer to win the category after Sidney Poitier, who was presented with an Honorary Academy Award the same night.

After appearing in 2002's box office success, the healthcare-themed "John Q.", Washington directed his first film, a well-reviewed drama called "Antwone Fisher", in which he also co-starred.

Between 2003 and 2004, Washington appeared in a series of thrillers that performed generally well at the box office, including "Out of Time", "Man on Fire", and "The Manchurian Candidate". In 2006, he starred in "Inside Man", a Spike Lee-directed bank heist thriller co-starring Jodie Foster and Clive Owen, released in March, and "Déjà Vu".

In 2007, Washington co-starred with Russell Crowe, for the second time after 1995's "Virtuosity", in Ridley Scott's "American Gangster". He also directed and starred in the drama "The Great Debaters" with Forest Whitaker. He next appeared in Tony Scott's 2009 film "The Taking of Pelham 123" (a remake of the 1974 thriller of the same name), where he played New York City subway security chief Walter Garber opposite John Travolta's villain.

In the summer of 1990, Washington appeared in the title role of the Public Theater's production of Shakespeare's "Richard III". In 2005, he appeared onstage again as Marcus Brutus in a Broadway production of "Julius Caesar". Despite mixed reviews, the production's limited run was a consistent sell-out. In the spring of 2010, Washington played Troy Maxson, opposite Viola Davis, in the Broadway revival of August Wilson's "Fences", for which he won a Tony Award for Best Actor in a Play on June 13, 2010.

From April to June 2014, Washington played the leading role in the Broadway production of Lorraine Hansberry's classic drama "A Raisin in the Sun", directed by Kenny Leon. The show received positive reviews and won the 2014 Tony Award for Best Revival of a Play.

Beginning March 22, 2018, Washington will star as Theodore "Hickey" Hickman in a Broadway revival of Eugene O'Neill's "The Iceman Cometh". The production, directed by George C. Wolfe, will begin regular performances April 26 and run for 14 weeks.

In 2010, Washington starred in "The Book of Eli", a post-Apocalyptic drama set in the near future. Also in 2010, he starred as a veteran railroad engineer in the action film "Unstoppable", about an unmanned, half-mile-long runaway freight train carrying dangerous cargo. The film was his fifth and final collaboration with director Tony Scott, following "Crimson Tide" (1995), "Man on Fire" (2004), "Déjà Vu" (2006) and "The Taking of Pelham 1 2 3" (2009).

In 2012, Washington starred in "Flight", for which he was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Actor. He co-starred with Ryan Reynolds in "Safe House", where he prepared for his role by subjecting himself to a torture session that included waterboarding. In 2013, Washington starred in "2 Guns", alongside Mark Wahlberg. In 2014, he starred in "The Equalizer", an action thriller film directed by Antoine Fuqua and written by Richard Wenk, based on the television series of same name starring Edward Woodward.

In 2016, Washington starred as one of the leads in the remake of 1960 western film of the same name, "The Magnificent Seven", alongside Chris Pratt, Ethan Hawke, Vincent D'Onofrio, Lee Byung-hun, Manuel Garcia-Rulfo, Martin Sensmeier, Haley Bennett, and Peter Sarsgaard. Principal photography began on May 18, 2015, in the north of Baton Rouge, Louisiana. The film premiered on September 8, 2016 at the 2016 Toronto International Film Festival, and was released in the United States in conventional and IMAX theatres on September 23, 2016.

In "The Magnificent Seven", Washington plays Sam Chisolm ("the Bounty Hunter"), a duly sworn warrant officer from Wichita, Kansas who goes after bad guys. Washington's character was renamed from Chris Adams (played by Yul Brynner in the original film) to Sam Chisolm. It is Washington's first Western film. Washington did not watch Western films growing up since it was the end of the Western era in the movies. Moreover, he and his siblings were barred from going to the cinema since his father was a minister in a church. They instead grew up watching biblical films like "King of Kings" and "The Ten Commandments". However, he has admitted seeing portions of "Rawhide" and "Bonanza" shows. He did not watch the original film in preparation for this but has watched "Seven Samurai". Fuqua said that Washington, whom he has twice collaborated with, was his first choice to be cast irrespective of which role. The producers were skeptical whether he would take the job since it was a Western film. Fuqua then flew to New York City to negotiate with Washington, who accepted the offer.

In 2016, Washington directed the film "Fences", co-starring Viola Davis and based on Wilson's play of the same name, with a script by Wilson. Set in 1950s Pittsburgh, Washington plays a former Negro league baseball player working as a waste collector who struggles to provide for his family and come to terms with the events of his life. The film was released on December 16, 2016, by Paramount Pictures. For his performance, Washington was nominated in the Best Actor category for a Golden Globe Award and an Academy Award. In 2017, Washington starred in the legal drama film "Roman J. Israel, Esq.". His performance was praised by critics and led to nominations for a Golden Globe Award, a Screen Actors Guild Award and an Academy Award, Washington's ninth Oscar nomination overall, and his sixth for Best Actor.

On June 25, 1983, Washington married Pauletta Pearson, whom he met on the set of his first screen work, the television film "Wilma". The couple have four children: John David (b. July 28, 1984), a former football player with the United Football League's Sacramento Mountain Lions (and before that, college football at Morehouse); Katia (b. November 27, 1986) who graduated from Yale University with a Bachelor of Arts in 2010; and twins Olivia and Malcolm (b. April 10, 1991). Malcolm graduated from the University of Pennsylvania with a degree in film studies, and Olivia played a role in Lee Daniels's film "The Butler". In 1995, Denzel and Pauletta renewed their wedding vows in South Africa with Archbishop Desmond Tutu officiating.

Washington is a devout Christian, and has considered becoming a preacher. He stated in 1999, "A part of me still says, 'Maybe, Denzel, you're supposed to preach. Maybe you're still compromising.' I've had an opportunity to play great men and, through their words, to preach. I take what talent I've been given seriously, and I want to use it for good." In 1995, he donated to help build the new West Angeles Church of God in Christ facility in Los Angeles. Washington says he reads the Bible daily.

Washington has served as the national spokesperson for Boys & Girls Clubs of America since 1993 and has appeared in public service announcements and awareness campaigns for the organization. In addition, he has served as a board member for Boys & Girls Clubs of America since 1995. Due to his philanthropic work with the Boys & Girls Club, PS 17X, a decided to officially name their school after Washington.

In mid-2004, Washington visited Brooke Army Medical Center (BAMC) at Fort Sam Houston, where he participated in a Purple Heart ceremony, presenting medals to three Army soldiers recovering from wounds they received while stationed in Iraq. He also visited the fort's Fisher House facilities, and after learning that it had exceeded its capacity, made a substantial donation to the Fisher House Foundation. Washington's other charitable contributions include to Nelson Mandela's Children's Fund in 1995 and to Wiley College to resuscitate the college's debate team.

Washington is an Independent voter. He supported Barack Obama in 2008.

Washington has been a big fan of the Dallas Cowboys and Los Angeles Lakers since childhood.

The Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia named Washington as one of three people (the others being directors Oliver Stone and Michael Moore) with whom they were willing to negotiate for the release of three defense contractors the group had held captive from 2003 to 2008.

On May 18, 1991, Washington was awarded an honorary doctorate from his alma mater, Fordham University, for having "impressively succeeded in exploring the edge of his multifaceted talent". In 2011, he donated $2 million to Fordham for an endowed chair of the theater department, as well as to establish a theater-specific scholarship at the school. He also received an honorary Doctorate of Humanities from Morehouse College on May 20, 2007. and an honorary Doctor of Arts degree from the University of Pennsylvania on May 16, 2011.

In 2008, Washington visited Israel with a delegation of African-American artists in honor of the state's 60th birthday. In 2010, he visited Israel again to meet with his friend, head of the Messianic Jews' congregation in Haifa

In April 2014, Washington presented at Broadway Cares/Equity Fights AIDS Easter Bonnet Competition with Bryan Cranston, Idina Menzel and Fran Drescher, after raising donations at his Broadway show "A Raisin in the Sun".



</doc>
<doc id="16103" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16103" title="John Wayne">
John Wayne

Marion Mitchell Morrison (born Marion Robert Morrison; May 26, 1907 – June 11, 1979), known professionally as John Wayne and nicknamed Duke, was an American actor and filmmaker. An Academy Award-winner for "True Grit" (1969), Wayne was among the top box office draws for three decades.

Born in Winterset, Iowa, Wayne grew up in Southern California. He was president of Glendale High class of 1925. He found work at local film studios when he lost his football scholarship to the University of Southern California as a result of a bodysurfing accident. Initially working for the Fox Film Corporation, he appeared mostly in small bit parts. His first leading role came in Raoul Walsh's widescreen epic "The Big Trail" (1930), which led to leading roles in numerous B movies throughout the 1930s, most of them in the Western genre.

Wayne's career took off in 1939, with John Ford's "Stagecoach" making him an instant star. He went on to star in 142 motion pictures altogether, including the dozens with his name above the title produced before 1939. Biographer Ronald Davis said, "John Wayne personified for millions the nation's frontier heritage. Eighty-three of his movies were Westerns, and in them he played cowboys, cavalrymen, and unconquerable loners extracted from the Republic's central creation myth."

Wayne's other well-known Western roles include a cattleman driving his herd north on the Chisholm Trail in "Red River" (1948), a Civil War veteran whose young niece is abducted by a tribe of Comanches in "The Searchers" (1956), a troubled rancher competing with a lawyer (James Stewart) for a woman's hand in marriage in "The Man Who Shot Liberty Valance" (1962), and a cantankerous one-eyed marshal in "True Grit" (1969). He is also remembered for his roles in "The Quiet Man" (1952), "Rio Bravo" (1959) with Dean Martin, and "The Longest Day" (1962). In his final screen performance, he starred as an aging gunfighter battling cancer in "The Shootist" (1976). He appeared with many important Hollywood stars of his era, and his last public appearance was at the Academy Awards ceremony on April 9, 1979.

Wayne was born Marion Robert Morrison on May 26, 1907 at 224 South Second Street in Winterset, Iowa. The local paper, "Winterset Madisonian", reported on page 4 of the edition of May 30, 1907 that Wayne weighed 13 lbs. (around 6 kg.) at birth. His middle name was soon changed from Robert to Mitchell when his parents decided to name their next son Robert. Wayne's father, Clyde Leonard Morrison (1884–1937), was the son of American Civil War veteran Marion Mitchell Morrison (1845–1915). Wayne's mother, the former Mary "Molly" Alberta Brown (1885–1970), was from Lancaster County, Nebraska. Wayne's ancestry included Scottish, Irish, Scots-Irish, and English. He was raised Presbyterian.

Wayne's family moved to Palmdale, California, and then in 1916 to Glendale, California, where his father worked as a pharmacist. He attended Glendale Union High School where he performed well in both sport and academics. Wayne was part of his high school's football team and its debating team. He was also the president of the Latin Society and contributed to the school's newspaper sports column.

A local fireman at the station on his route to school in Glendale started calling him "Little Duke" because he never went anywhere without his huge Airedale Terrier, Duke. He preferred "Duke" to "Marion", and the nickname stuck. Wayne attended Wilson Middle School in Glendale. As a teen, he worked in an ice cream shop for a man who shod horses for Hollywood studios. He was also active as a member of the Order of DeMolay, a youth organization of the Freemasons. He played football for the 1924 league champion Glendale High School team.

Wayne applied to the U.S. Naval Academy, but he was not accepted. He, instead, attended the University of Southern California (USC), majoring in pre-law. He was a member of the Trojan Knights and Sigma Chi fraternities. Wayne also played on the USC football team under coach Howard Jones. A broken collarbone injury curtailed his athletic career; Wayne later noted that he was too terrified of Jones' reaction to reveal the actual cause of his injury, a bodysurfing accident. He lost his athletic scholarship, and without funds, had to leave the university.

As a favor to USC football coach Howard Jones, who had given silent western film star, Tom Mix, tickets to USC games, director John Ford, and Mix hired Wayne as a prop boy and extra. Wayne later credited his walk, talk, and persona to his acquaintance with Wyatt Earp, who was good friends with Tom Mix. Wayne soon moved to bit parts, establishing a longtime friendship with the director who provided most of those roles, John Ford. Early in this period, he had a minor, uncredited role as a guard in the 1926 film "Bardelys the Magnificent". Wayne also appeared with his USC teammates playing football in "Brown of Harvard" (1926), "The Dropkick" (1927), and "Salute" (1929) and Columbia's "Maker of Men" (filmed in 1930, released in 1931).

While working for Fox Film Corporation in bit roles, Wayne was given on-screen credit as "Duke Morrison" only once, in "Words and Music" (1929). Director Raoul Walsh saw him moving studio furniture while working as a prop boy and cast him in his first starring role in "The Big Trail" (1930). For his screen name, Walsh suggested "Anthony Wayne", after Revolutionary War general "Mad" Anthony Wayne. Fox Studios chief Winfield Sheehan rejected it as sounding "too Italian". Walsh then suggested "John Wayne". Sheehan agreed, and the name was set. Wayne was not even present for the discussion. His pay was raised to $105 a week.

"The Big Trail" was to be the first big-budget outdoor spectacle of the sound era, made at a then-staggering cost of over $2 million, using hundreds of extras and wide vistas of the American southwest, still largely unpopulated at the time. To take advantage of the breathtaking scenery, it was filmed in two versions, a standard 35-mm version and another in the new 70 mm Grandeur film process, using an innovative camera and lenses. Many in the audience who saw it in Grandeur stood and cheered. However, only a handful of theaters were equipped to show the film in its widescreen process, and the effort was largely wasted. Despite being highly regarded by modern critics, the film was considered a huge box office flop at the time.

After the commercial failure of "The Big Trail", Wayne was relegated to small roles in A-pictures, including Columbia's "The Deceiver" (1931), in which he played a corpse. He appeared in the serial "The Three Musketeers" (1933), an updated version of the Alexandre Dumas novel in which the protagonists were soldiers in the French Foreign Legion in then-contemporary North Africa. He played the lead, with his name over the title, in many low-budget Poverty Row Westerns, mostly at Monogram Pictures and serials for Mascot Pictures Corporation. By Wayne's own estimation, he appeared in about 80 of these horse operas from 1930 to 1939. In "Riders of Destiny" (1933), he became one of the first singing cowboys of film, albeit via dubbing. Wayne also appeared in some of the "Three Mesquiteers" Westerns, whose title was a play on the Dumas classic. He was mentored by stuntmen in riding and other Western skills. Stuntman Yakima Canutt and Wayne developed and perfected stunts and onscreen fisticuffs techniques which are still in use.

Wayne's breakthrough role came with John Ford's "Stagecoach" (1939). Because of Wayne's B-movie status and track record in low-budget Westerns throughout the 1930s, Ford had difficulty getting financing for what was to be an A-budget film. After rejection by all the main studios, Ford struck a deal with independent producer Walter Wanger in which Claire Trevor—a much bigger star at the time—received top billing. "Stagecoach" was a huge critical and financial success, and Wayne became a mainstream star. Cast member Louise Platt credited Ford as saying at the time that Wayne would become the biggest star ever because of his appeal as the archetypal "everyman".

America's entry into World War II resulted in a deluge of support for the war effort from all sectors of society, and Hollywood was no exception. Wayne was exempted from service due to his age (34 at the time of Pearl Harbor) and family status (classified as 3-A - family deferment) although actor Henry Fonda, born two years earlier, volunteered and served three years. Wayne repeatedly wrote to John Ford saying he wanted to enlist, on one occasion inquiring whether he could get into Ford's military unit, but consistently kept postponing it until after "he finished just one or two pictures". Wayne did not attempt to prevent his reclassification as 1-A (draft eligible), but Republic Studios was emphatically resistant to losing him since he was their only A-list actor under contract. Herbert J. Yates, President of Republic, threatened Wayne with a lawsuit if he walked away from his contract, and Republic Pictures intervened in the Selective Service process, requesting Wayne's further deferment.

Wayne toured U.S. bases and hospitals in the South Pacific for three months in 1943 and 1944. with the USO. By many accounts, his failure to serve in the military was the most painful part of his life. His widow later suggested that his patriotism in later decades sprang from guilt, writing: "He would become a 'superpatriot' for the rest of his life trying to atone for staying home."

U.S. National Archives records indicate that Wayne had, in fact, made an application to serve in the Office of Strategic Services (OSS), precursor to the modern CIA, and had been accepted within the U.S. Army's allotted billet to the OSS. William J. Donovan, OSS Commander, wrote Wayne a letter informing him of his acceptance into the Field Photographic Unit, but the letter went to his estranged wife Josephine's home. She never told him about it. Donovan also issued an OSS Certificate of Service to Wayne.

Wayne's first color film was "Shepherd of the Hills" (1941), in which he co-starred with his longtime friend Harry Carey. The following year, he appeared in his only film directed by Cecil B. DeMille, the Technicolor epic "Reap the Wild Wind" (1942), in which he co-starred with Ray Milland and Paulette Goddard; it was one of the rare times he played a character with questionable values.

In 1949, director Robert Rossen offered the starring role of "All the King's Men" to Wayne. Wayne refused, believing the script to be un-American in many ways. Broderick Crawford, who eventually got the role, won the 1949 Oscar for best male actor, ironically beating out Wayne, who had been nominated for "Sands of Iwo Jima."

He lost the leading role in "The Gunfighter" (1950) to Gregory Peck due to his refusal to work for Columbia Pictures because its chief, Harry Cohn, had mistreated him years before when he was a young contract player. Cohn had bought the project for Wayne, but Wayne's grudge was too deep, and Cohn sold the script to Twentieth Century Fox, which cast Peck in the role Wayne badly wanted but for which he refused to bend.

One of Wayne's most popular roles was in "The High and the Mighty" (1954), directed by William Wellman, and based on a novel by Ernest K. Gann. His portrayal of a heroic copilot won widespread acclaim. Wayne also portrayed aviators in "Flying Tigers (1942)," "Flying Leathernecks" (1951), "Island in the Sky" (1953), "The Wings of Eagles" (1957), and "Jet Pilot" (1957).

He appeared in nearly two dozen of John Ford's films over twenty years, including "She Wore a Yellow Ribbon" (1949), "The Quiet Man" (1952), "The Wings of Eagles" (1957), and "The Man Who Shot Liberty Valance" (1962) with James Stewart: the first movie in which he called someone "Pilgrim". Ford's "The Searchers" (1956), is often considered to contain Wayne's finest and most complex performance. He named his youngest son Ethan after the character.

John Wayne won a Best Actor Oscar for "True Grit" (1969). This came 20 years after his only other nomination. Wayne was also nominated as the producer of Best Picture for "The Alamo" (1960), one of two films he directed. The other was "The Green Berets" (1968), the only major film made during the Vietnam War to support the war. During the filming of "The Green Berets", the Degar or Montagnard people of Vietnam's Central Highlands, fierce fighters against communism, bestowed on Wayne a brass bracelet that he wore in the film and all subsequent films.

Wayne took on the role of the eponymous detective in the crime drama "McQ" (1974). His last film was "The Shootist" (1976), whose main character, J. B. Books, was dying of cancer—the illness to which Wayne himself succumbed three years later.

Batjac, the production company cofounded by Wayne, was named after the fictional shipping company Batjak in "Wake of the Red Witch" (1948), a film based on the novel by Garland Roark. (A spelling error by Wayne's secretary was allowed to stand, accounting for the variation.) Batjac (and its predecessor, Wayne-Fellows Productions) was the arm through which Wayne produced many films for himself and other stars. Its best-known non-Wayne productions were "Seven Men From Now" (1956), which started the classic collaboration between director Budd Boetticher and star Randolph Scott, and "Gun the Man Down" (1956) with contract player James Arness as an outlaw.

In the "Motion Picture Herald" Top Ten Money-Making Western Stars poll, Wayne was listed in 1936 and 1939. He appeared in the similar "Box Office" poll in 1939 and 1940. While these two polls are really an indication only of the popularity of series stars, Wayne also appeared in the Top Ten Money Makers Poll of all films from 1949 to 1957 and 1958 to 1974, taking first place in 1950, 1951, 1954, and 1971. With a total of 25 years on the list, Wayne has more appearances than any other star, surpassing Clint Eastwood (21) who is in second place.

In later years, Wayne was recognized as a sort of American natural resource, and his various critics, of his performances and his politics, viewed him with more respect. Abbie Hoffman, the radical of the 1960s, paid tribute to Wayne's singularity, saying, "I like Wayne's wholeness, his style. As for his politics, well—I suppose even cavemen felt a little admiration for the dinosaurs that were trying to gobble them up." Reviewing "The Cowboys" (1972), Vincent Canby of "The New York Times", who did not particularly care for the film, wrote: "Wayne is, of course, marvelously indestructible, and he has become an almost perfect father figure".

Like most Hollywood stars, Wayne appeared as a guest on various radio programs, such as "The Hedda Hopper Show" and "The Louella Parsons Show". He made a number of appearances in dramatic roles, mainly recreations for radio of his own films, on programs like "Screen Directors Playhouse" and "Lux Radio Theatre". For six months in 1942, Wayne starred in his own radio adventure series, "Three Sheets to the Wind", produced by film director Tay Garnett. In the series, an international spy/detective show, Wayne played Dan O'Brien, a detective who used alcoholism as a mask for his investigatory endeavors. The show was intended by Garnett to be a pilot of sorts for a film version, though the motion picture never came to fruition. No episodes of the series featuring Wayne seem to exist, though a demonstration episode with Brian Donlevy in the leading role does exist. Wayne, not Donlevy, played the role throughout the series run on NBC.

Wayne was married three times and divorced twice. He was fluent in Spanish and his three wives, one of Spanish American descent and two of Hispanic descent, were Josephine Alicia Saenz, Esperanza Baur, and Pilar Pallete. He had four children with Josephine: Michael Wayne (November 23, 1934 – April 2, 2003), Mary Antonia "Toni" Wayne LaCava (February 25, 1936 – December 6, 2000), Patrick Wayne (born July 15, 1939), and Melinda Wayne Munoz (born December 3, 1940). He had three more children with Pilar: Aissa Wayne (born March 31, 1956), John Ethan Wayne (born February 22, 1962), and Marisa Wayne (born February 22, 1966).

Several of Wayne's children entered the film and television industry; Wayne's son Ethan was billed as John Ethan Wayne in a few films, and played one of the leads in the 1990s update of the "Adam-12" television series.

His stormiest divorce was from Esperanza Baur, a former Mexican actress. She believed that Wayne and co-star Gail Russell were having an affair, a claim which both Wayne and Russell denied. The night the film "Angel and the Badman" (1947) wrapped, there was the usual party for cast and crew, and Wayne came home very late. Esperanza was in a drunken rage by the time he arrived, and she attempted to shoot him as he walked through the front door.

Wayne had several high-profile affairs, including one with Marlene Dietrich that lasted for three years and one with Merle Oberon that lasted from 1938 to 1947. After his separation from his wife, Pilar, in 1973, Wayne became romantically involved and lived with his former secretary Pat Stacy (1941–1995) until his death in 1979. She published a biography of her life with him in 1983, titled "Duke: A Love Story".

Wayne's hair began to thin in the 1940s, and he had begun to wear a hairpiece by the end of the decade. He was occasionally seen in public without the hairpiece (such as, according to "Life" magazine, at Gary Cooper's funeral). During a widely noted appearance at Harvard University, Wayne was asked by a student "Is it true that your toupée is real mohair?" He responded: "Well sir, that's real hair. Not mine, but real hair."

A close friend of Wayne's, California Congressman Alphonzo E. Bell, Jr., wrote of him, "Duke's personality and sense of humor were very close to what the general public saw on the big screen. It is perhaps best shown in these words he had engraved on a plaque: 'Each of us is a mixture of some good and some not so good qualities. In considering one's fellow man it's important to remember the good things ... We should refrain from making judgments just because a fella happens to be a dirty, rotten SOB.'"

Wayne biographer Michael Munn chronicled Wayne's drinking habits. According to Sam O'Steen's memoir, "Cut to the Chase", studio directors knew to shoot Wayne's scenes before noon, because by afternoon he "was a mean drunk". He had been a chain smoker of cigarettes since young adulthood and was diagnosed with lung cancer in 1964. He underwent successful surgery to remove his entire left lung and four ribs. Despite efforts by his business associates to prevent him from going public with his illness for fear that it would cost him work, Wayne announced he had cancer and called on the public to get preventive examinations. Five years later, Wayne was declared cancer-free. Wayne has been credited with coining the term "The Big C" as a euphemism for cancer.

Wayne's height has been perennially described as at least .

He was a Freemason, a Master Mason in Marion McDaniel Lodge No. 56 F&AM, in Tucson, Arizona. He became a 32nd Degree Scottish Rite Mason and later joined the Al Malaikah Shrine Temple in Los Angeles. He became a member of the York Rite. During the early 1960s, John Wayne traveled extensively to Panama, during which he purchased the island of Taborcillo off the main coast. It was sold by his estate at his death.

Wayne's yacht, the "Wild Goose", was one of his favorite possessions. He kept it docked in Newport Harbor and it was listed on the U.S. National Register of Historic Places in 2011.

Wayne was fond of literature, his favorite authors being Charles Dickens, Arthur Conan Doyle and Agatha Christie. His favorite books were "David Copperfield", and Conan Doyle's historical novels "The White Company" and "Sir Nigel".

Throughout most of his life, Wayne was a vocally prominent conservative Republican in Hollywood, supporting anti-communist positions. Initially a self-described socialist during his college years, he voted for Democratic President Franklin D. Roosevelt in the 1936 presidential election and expressed admiration for Roosevelt's successor, fellow Democratic President Harry S. Truman. He took part in creating the conservative Motion Picture Alliance for the Preservation of American Ideals in February 1944, and was elected president of that organization in 1949. An ardent anti-communist and vocal supporter of the House Un-American Activities Committee, he made "Big Jim McLain" (1952) with himself as a HUAC investigator to demonstrate his support for the cause of anti-communism. Declassified Soviet documents reveal that, despite being a fan of Wayne's movies, Soviet leader Joseph Stalin contemplated assassination of Wayne for his frequently espoused anti-communist politics.

Wayne supported Vice President Richard Nixon in the presidential election of 1960, but expressed his vision of patriotism when John F. Kennedy won the election: "I didn't vote for him but he's my president, and I hope he does a good job." He used his star power to support conservative causes, including rallying support for the Vietnam War by producing, codirecting, and starring in the financially successful, critically panned "The Green Berets" (1968).

Due to his status as the highest profile Republican star in Hollywood, wealthy Texas Republican Party backers asked Wayne to run for national office in 1968, as had his friend and fellow actor Senator George Murphy. He declined, joking that he did not believe the public would seriously consider an actor in the White House. Instead, he supported his friend Ronald Reagan's runs for Governor of California in 1966 and 1970. He was asked to be the running mate for Democratic Alabama Governor George Wallace in 1968, but he rejected the offer and actively campaigned for Richard Nixon; Wayne addressed the Republican National Convention on its opening day in August 1968. For a while, he was also a member of the anti-communist John Birch Society.

Wayne openly differed with the Republican Party over the issue of the Panama Canal, as he supported the Panama Canal Treaty in the mid-1970s; conservatives had wanted the U.S. to retain full control of the canal, but Wayne believed that the Panamanians had the right to the canal and sided with President Jimmy Carter and the Democrats. Wayne was a close friend of the late Panamanian leader Omar Torrijos Herrera, and Wayne's first wife, Josephine, was a native of Panama. His support of the treaty brought him hate mail for the first time in his life.

In May 1971, "Playboy" magazine published an interview with Wayne which resulted in a firestorm of controversy. Wayne expressed his support for the Vietnam War, and made headlines for his resolute opinions about social issues and race relations in the United States:

In the same "Playboy" interview, Wayne also responded to questions about whether social programs were good for the country:
Although he enrolled in a cancer vaccine study in an attempt to ward off the disease, Wayne died of stomach cancer at the age of 72 on June 11, 1979, at the UCLA Medical Center, and was buried in the Pacific View Memorial Park cemetery in Corona del Mar, Newport Beach. According to his son Patrick and his grandson Matthew Muñoz, a priest in the California Diocese of Orange, he converted to Roman Catholicism shortly before his death. He requested that his tombstone read "Feo, Fuerte y Formal", a Spanish epitaph Wayne described as meaning "ugly, strong, and dignified". The grave, which went unmarked for 20 years, is now marked with a quotation from his controversial 1971 "Playboy" interview: "Tomorrow is the most important thing in life. Comes into us at midnight very clean. It's perfect when it arrives and it puts itself in our hands. It hopes we've learned something from yesterday."

Among the cast and crew who filmed "The Conqueror" (1956) on location near St. George, Utah, 91 developed some form of cancer at various times, including stars Wayne, Susan Hayward, Agnes Moorehead, Pedro Armendáriz, and director Dick Powell. The film was shot in southwestern Utah, east of and generally downwind from the site of recent U.S. Government nuclear weapons tests in southeastern Nevada. Many contend that radioactive fallout from these tests contaminated the film location and poisoned the film crew working there. Despite the suggestion that Wayne's 1964 lung cancer and his 1979 stomach cancer resulted from nuclear contamination, he believed his lung cancer to have been a result of his six-packs-a-day cigarette habit.

Wayne's enduring status as an iconic American was formally recognized by the U.S. government in the form of the two highest civilian decorations. On May 26, 1979, he was awarded the Congressional Gold Medal. Hollywood figures and American leaders from across the political spectrum, including Maureen O'Hara, Elizabeth Taylor, Frank Sinatra, Mike Frankovich, Katharine Hepburn, General and Mrs. Omar Bradley, Gregory Peck, Robert Stack, James Arness, and Kirk Douglas, testified to Congress in support of the award. Robert Aldrich, president of the Directors Guild of America, made a particularly notable statement:

Wayne was posthumously awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom on June 9, 1980, by President Jimmy Carter. He had attended Carter's inaugural ball "as a member of the loyal opposition", as he described it. In 1998, he was awarded the Naval Heritage Award by the US Navy Memorial Foundation for his support of the Navy and military during his film career. In 1999, the American Film Institute (AFI) named Wayne 13th among the Greatest Male Screen Legends of Classic Hollywood cinema.

Various public locations are named in honor of Wayne, including the John Wayne Airport in Orange County, California, where a nine-foot bronze statue of him stands at the entrance; the John Wayne Marina for which Wayne bequeathed the land, near Sequim, Washington; John Wayne Elementary School (P.S. 380) in Brooklyn, New York, which boasts a 38-foot mosaic mural commission by New York artist Knox Martin entitled "John Wayne and the American Frontier"; and a 100-plus-mile trail named the "John Wayne Pioneer Trail" in Washington's Iron Horse State Park. A larger than life-size bronze statue of Wayne atop a horse was erected at the corner of La Cienega Boulevard and Wilshire Boulevard in Beverly Hills, California, at the former offices of the Great Western Savings and Loan Corporation, for which Wayne had made a number of commercials. In the city of Maricopa, Arizona, part of Arizona State Route 347 is named John Wayne Parkway, which runs through the center of town.

In 2006, friends of Wayne and his former Arizona business partner, Louis Johnson, inaugurated the "Louie and the Duke Classics" events benefiting the John Wayne Cancer Foundation and the American Cancer Society. The weekend-long event each fall in Casa Grande, Arizona, includes a golf tournament, an auction of John Wayne memorabilia, and a team roping competition.

Several celebrations took place on May 26, 2007, the centennial of Wayne's birth. A celebration at the John Wayne birthplace in Winterset, Iowa, included chuck-wagon suppers, concerts by Michael Martin Murphey and Riders in the Sky, a Wild West Revue in the style of Buffalo Bill's Wild West show, and a Cowboy Symposium with Wayne's costars, producers, and costumers. Wayne's films ran repetitively at the local theater. Ground was broken for the New John Wayne Birthplace Museum and Learning Center at a ceremony consisting of over 30 of Wayne's family members, including Melinda Wayne Muñoz, Aissa, Ethan, and Marisa Wayne. Later that year, California Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger and First Lady Maria Shriver inducted Wayne into the California Hall of Fame, located at The California Museum for History, Women and the Arts.

In 2016 Republican assemblyman Matthew Harper proposed marking May 26 as "John Wayne Day" in California. This resolution was struck down by a vote of 35 to 20, due to Wayne's views on race and his support of controversial organizations such as the John Birch Society and the House Un-American Activities Committee.

Wayne rose beyond the typical recognition for a famous actor to that of an enduring icon who symbolized and communicated American values and ideals. By the middle of his career, Wayne had developed a larger-than-life image, and as his career progressed, he selected roles that would not compromise his off-screen image. At a party in 1957, Wayne confronted actor Kirk Douglas about the latter's decision to play the role of Vincent van Gogh in the film "Lust for Life", saying: "Christ, Kirk, how can you play a part like that? There's so goddamn few of us left. We got to play strong, tough characters. Not these weak queers."

Wayne's rise to being the quintessential movie war hero began to take shape four years after World War II, when "Sands of Iwo Jima" (1949) was released. His footprints at Grauman's Chinese theater in Hollywood were laid in concrete that contained sand from Iwo Jima. His status grew so large and legendary that when Japanese Emperor Hirohito visited the United States in 1975, he asked to meet John Wayne, the symbolic representation of his country's former enemy. Likewise when Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev visited the United States in 1959, he made two requests: to visit Disneyland and meet Wayne.

Wayne is the only actor to appear in every edition of the annual Harris Poll of Most Popular Film Actors, and the only actor to appear on the list after his death. Wayne has been in the top ten in this poll for 19 consecutive years, starting in 1994, 15 years after his death.

The John Wayne Cancer Foundation was founded in 1985 in honor of John Wayne, after his family granted the use of his name for the continued fight against cancer. The foundation's mission is to "bring courage, strength, and grit to the fight against cancer". The foundation provides funds for innovative programs that improve cancer patient care, including research, education, awareness, and support.

Newport Beach, California-based John Wayne Enterprises sells products such as Kentucky straight bourbon using Wayne's picture. When the company tried to trademark the image appearing on one of the bottles, Duke University in Durham, North Carolina, filed a notice of opposition. According to court documents, Duke has tried three times since 2005 to stop the company from trademarking the name. The company wants a federal judge in Orange County, California, to declare that both brands can be allowed. The company's complaint filed in federal court says the university "does not own the word 'Duke' in all contexts for all purposes." The university's official position is not to object if Wayne's image is used, but if the company wants to use the Duke name without Wayne, the university says, "we are also committed to protecting the integrity of Duke University's trademarks." Richard Howell, an attorney for John Wayne Enterprises, said the company supports a co-use agreement, though he believed the name "Duke" would be more likely associated with Wayne than with the university.

On September 30, 2014, federal judge David Carter dismissed the suit against Duke University, saying the jurisdiction was incorrect.

Between 1926 and 1976, Wayne appeared in over 170 motion pictures, and became one of America's biggest box office stars. Only Clark Gable sold more tickets than Wayne, although the ticket prices were not commensurate since, although both actors started their careers at the same time, Gable's career height preceded Wayne's by approximately fifteen years.


As shown below, Wayne was nominated for three Academy Awards, winning once for Best Actor in a Leading Role in 1969.

The category's nominees for each year in which Wayne was nominated are shown, with that year's winner highlighted in yellow.

The Golden Globe Awards are presented annually by the Hollywood Foreign Press Association (HFPA) to recognize outstanding achievements in the entertainment industry, both domestic and foreign, and to focus wide public attention upon the best in motion pictures and television. In 1953, Wayne was awarded the Henrietta Award (a now retired award) for being World Film Favorite: Male.

The Cecil B. DeMille Award for lifetime achievement in motion pictures is an annual award given by the Hollywood Foreign Press Association at the Golden Globe Award ceremonies in Hollywood. It was named in honor of Cecil B. DeMille (1881–1959), one of the industry's most successful filmmakers; John Wayne won the award in 1966.

In 1970, Wayne won a Golden Globe Award for his performance in "True Grit".

In 1973, "The Harvard Lampoon", a satirical paper run by Harvard University students, invited Wayne to receive The Brass Balls Award, created in his "honor", after calling him "the biggest fraud in history". Harvard Square had become known for leftist intellectualism and protest throughout the 1960s and 1970s. Wayne accepted the invitation as a chance to promote the recently released film "McQ", and a Fort Devens Army convoy offered to drive him into the square on an armored personnel carrier. The ceremony was held on January 15, 1974, at the Harvard Square Theater and the award was officially presented in honor of Wayne's "outstanding machismo and penchant for punching people". Although the convoy was met with protests by members of the American Indian Movement and others, some of whom threw snowballs, Wayne received a standing ovation from the audience when he walked onto the stage. An internal investigation was launched into the Army's involvement in the day.

In the 2003 sci-fi cartoon Bounty Hamster, the titular protagonist, a talking blue hamster named Marion, is parodic of John Wayne's real first name and the character he played in True Grit.




</doc>
<doc id="16521" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16521" title="Jon Voight">
Jon Voight

Jonathan Vincent Voight (; born December 29, 1938) is an American actor. He is the winner of one Academy Award, having been nominated for four. He has also won four Golden Globe Awards and was nominated for eleven. He is the father of actress Angelina Jolie and actor James Haven.

Voight came to prominence in the late 1960s with his performance as Joe Buck, a would-be gigolo in "Midnight Cowboy" (1969). During the 1970s, he became a Hollywood star with his portrayals of a businessman mixed up with murder in "Deliverance" (1972); a paraplegic Vietnam veteran in "Coming Home" (1978), for which he won an Academy Award for Best Leading Actor; and a penniless ex-boxing champion in the remake of "The Champ" (1979).

Although his output slowed during the 1980s, Voight received critical acclaim for his performance as a ruthless bank robber in "Runaway Train" (1985). During the 1990s, Voight made somewhat of a comeback, starring in Michael Mann's cult classic "Heat" (1995) opposite Robert De Niro and Al Pacino. He portrayed a rogue spy in "Mission: Impossible" (1996), a corrupt NSA agent in "Enemy of the State" (1998), and an unscrupulous attorney in Francis Ford Coppola's "The Rainmaker" (1997), which earned him a Golden Globe nomination for Best Supporting Actor. Voight gave critically acclaimed biographical performances during the 2000s, appearing as sportscaster Howard Cosell in "Ali" (2001) for which he was nominated for an Academy Award, as Nazi officer Jürgen Stroop in "Uprising" (2001), as Franklin D. Roosevelt in Michael Bay's "Pearl Harbor" (2001) and as Pope John Paul II in the eponymous miniseries (2005). Voight also appears in Showtime's "Ray Donovan" TV series as Mickey Donovan, a role that brought him newfound critical and audience praise and his fourth Golden Globe win in 2014.

Voight was born on December 29, 1938, in Yonkers, New York, the son of Barbara (; 1910–1995) and Elmer Voight (né Voytka; 1909–1973), a professional golfer. He has two brothers, Barry Voight (born 1937), a former volcanologist at Pennsylvania State University, and Wesley Voight (born March 21, 1940), known as Chip Taylor, a singer-songwriter who wrote "Wild Thing" and "Angel of the Morning." Voight's paternal grandfather and his paternal grandmother's parents were Slovak immigrants, while his maternal grandfather and his maternal grandmother's parents were German immigrants.

Voight was raised as a Catholic and attended Archbishop Stepinac High School in White Plains, New York, where he first took an interest in acting, playing the comedic role of Count Pepi Le Loup in the school's annual musical, "The Song of Norway". Following his graduation in 1956, he enrolled at The Catholic University of America in Washington, D.C., where he majored in art and graduated with a B.A. in 1960. After graduation, Voight moved to New York City, where he pursued an acting career.

In 1962, Voight married actress Lauri Peters, who he met when they both appeared in the original Broadway production of "The Sound of Music". They divorced in 1967. He married actress Marcheline Bertrand in 1971. They separated in 1976, filed for divorce in 1978, and divorced in 1980. Their children, James Haven (born May 11, 1973) and Angelina Jolie (born June 4, 1975), would go on to enter the film business as actors and producers. Voight was estranged from his children for several years, but they reconciled in 2007 after Bertrand's death.

In the early 1960s, Voight found work in television, appearing in several episodes of "Gunsmoke", between 1963 and 1968, as well as guest spots on "Naked City", and "The Defenders", both in 1963, and "Twelve O'Clock High", in 1966.

His theatre career took off in January 1965, playing Rodolfo in Arthur Miller's "A View from the Bridge" in an Off-Broadway revival.

Voight's film debut did not come until 1967, when he took a part in Phillip Kaufman's crimefighter spoof, "Fearless Frank". Voight also took a small role in 1967's western, "Hour of the Gun", directed by veteran helmer John Sturges. In 1968 Voight took a role in director Paul Williams's "Out of It".

In 1969, Voight was cast in the groundbreaking "Midnight Cowboy", a film that would make his career. Voight played Joe Buck, a naïve male hustler from Texas, adrift in New York City. He comes under the tutelage of Dustin Hoffman's Ratso Rizzo, a tubercular petty thief and con artist. The film explored late 1960s New York and the development of an unlikely, but poignant friendship between the two main characters. Directed by John Schlesinger and based on a novel by James Leo Herlihy, the film struck a chord with critics and audiences. Because of its controversial themes, the film was released with an X rating and would make history by being the only X-rated feature to win Best Picture at the Academy Awards. Both Voight and co-star Hoffman were nominated for Best Actor, but lost out to John Wayne in" True Grit."

In 1970, Voight appeared in Mike Nichols' adaptation of "Catch-22", and re-teamed with director Paul Williams to star in "The Revolutionary", as a left wing college student struggling with his conscience.

Voight next appeared in 1972's "Deliverance." Directed by John Boorman, from a script that poet James Dickey had helped to adapt from his novel of the same name, it tells the story of a canoe trip gone awry in a feral, backwoods America. The film and the performances of Voight and co-star Burt Reynolds received great critical acclaim and were popular with audiences.

He also appeared at the Studio Arena Theater, in Buffalo, New York in the Tennessee Williams play "A Streetcar Named Desire" from 1973-74 as Stanley Kowalski.

Voight played a directionless young boxer in 1973's "The All American Boy", then appeared in the 1974 film, "Conrack", directed by Martin Ritt. Based on Pat Conroy's autobiographical novel "The Water Is Wide", Voight portrayed the title character, an idealistic young schoolteacher sent to teach underprivileged black children on a remote South Carolina island. The same year he appeared in "The Odessa File", based on Frederick Forsyth's thriller, as Peter Miller, a young German journalist who discovers a conspiracy to protect former Nazis still operating within Germany. This film first teamed him with the actor-director Maximilian Schell, who acted out a character named and based on the "Butcher of Riga" Eduard Roschmann, and for whom Voight would appear in 1976's "End of the Game", a psychological thriller based on a story by Swiss novelist and playwright Friedrich Dürrenmatt.

Voight was Steven Spielberg's first choice for the role of Matt Hooper in the 1975 film "Jaws", but he turned down the role, which was ultimately played by Richard Dreyfuss.

In 1978, Voight portrayed the paraplegic Vietnam veteran Luke Martin in Hal Ashby's film "Coming Home," and was awarded Best Actor at the Cannes Film Festival, for his portrait of an embittered paraplegic, reportedly based on real-life Vietnam veteran-turned-antiwar-activist Ron Kovic, with whom Fonda's character falls in love. The film included a much-talked-about love scene between the two. Jane Fonda won her second Best Actress award for her role, and Voight won for Best Actor in a Leading Role.

In 1979, Voight once again put on boxing gloves, starring in 1979's remake of the 1931 Wallace Beery and Jackie Cooper vehicle, "The Champ," with Voight playing the part of an alcoholic ex-heavyweight and a young Ricky Schroder playing the role of his adoring son. The film was an international success, but less popular with American audiences.

He next reteamed with director Ashby in 1982's "Lookin' to Get Out", in which he played Alex Kovac, a con man who has run into debt with New York mobsters and hopes to win enough in Las Vegas to pay them off. Voight both co-wrote the script and also co-produced. He also produced and acted in 1983's "Table for Five", in which he played a widower bringing up his children by himself.

Also in 1983, Voight was slated to play Robert Harmon in John Cassavetes' Golden Bear-winning "Love Streams", having performed the role on stage in 1981. However, a few weeks before shooting began, Voight announced that he also wanted to direct the picture and was consequently dropped.

In 1985, Voight teamed up with Russian writer and director Andrei Konchalovsky to play the role of escaped con Manny Manheim in "Runaway Train". The script was based on a story by Akira Kurosawa, and paired Voight with Eric Roberts as a fellow escapee. Voight received an Academy Award nomination for Best Actor and won the Golden Globe's award for Best Actor. Roberts was also honored for his performance, receiving an Academy Award nomination for Best Supporting Actor.

Voight followed up this and other performances with a role in the 1986 film, "Desert Bloom", and reportedly experienced a "spiritual awakening" toward the end of the decade. In 1989 Voight starred in and helped write "Eternity," which dealt with a television reporter's efforts to uncover corruption.

He made his first acting debut into television movies, acting in 1991's "Chernobyl: The Final Warning", followed by "The Last of his Tribe", in 1992. He followed with 1992's "The Rainbow Warrior" for ABC, the story of the ill-fated Greenpeace ship sunk by French operatives in the Auckland Harbour. For the remainder of the decade, Voight would alternate between feature films and television movies, including a starring role in the 1993 miniseries "Return to Lonesome Dove", a continuation of Larry McMurtry's western saga, 1989's "Lonesome Dove". Voight played Captain Woodrow F. Call, the part played by Tommy Lee Jones in the original miniseries. Voight made a cameo appearance as himself on the "Seinfeld" episode "The Mom & Pop Store" airing November 17, 1994, in which George Costanza buys a car that appears to be owned by Jon Voight. Voight described the process leading up to the episode in an interview on the Red Carpet at the 2006 BAFTA Emmy Awards:

In 1992, Voight appeared in the HBO film "The Last of His Tribe".

In 1995, Voight played the role of "Nate", a fence in the film, "Heat", directed by Michael Mann, and appeared in the television films "Convict Cowboy," and "The Tin Soldier," also directing the latter film.

Voight next appeared in 1996's blockbuster film "", directed by Brian De Palma and starring Tom Cruise. Voight played the role of spymaster James Phelps, a role originated by Peter Graves in the television series.

In 1997, Voight appeared in six films, beginning with "Rosewood", based on the 1923 destruction of the primarily black town of Rosewood, Florida, by the white residents of nearby Sumner. Voight played John Wright, a white Rosewood storeowner who follows his conscience and protects his black customers from the white rage. Voight next appeared in "Anaconda". Set in the Amazon, Voight played Paul Sarone, a snake hunter obsessed with a fabled giant anaconda, who hijacks an unwitting National Geographic film crew looking for a remote Indian tribe. Voight next appeared in a supporting role in Oliver Stone's "U Turn", portraying a blind man. Voight took a supporting role in "The Rainmaker", adopted from the John Grisham novel and directed by Francis Ford Coppola. He played an unscrupulous lawyer representing an insurance company, facing off with a neophyte lawyer played by Matt Damon. His last film of 1997 was "Boys Will Be Boys", a family comedy directed by Dom DeLuise.

The following year, Voight had the lead role in the television film "The Fixer", in which he played Jack Killoran, a lawyer who crosses ethical lines in order to "fix" things for his wealthy clients. A near-fatal accident awakens his dormant conscience and Killoran soon runs afoul of his former clients. He also took a substantial role in Tony Scott's 1998 political thriller, "Enemy of the State," in which Voight played Will Smith's character's stalwart antagonist from the NSA .

Voight was reunited with director Boorman in 1998's "The General". Set in Dublin, Ireland, the film tells the true-life story of the charismatic leader of a gang of thieves, Martin Cahill, at odds with both the police and the Provisional IRA. Voight portrays Inspector Ned Kenny, determined to bring Cahill to justice.

Voight next appeared in 1999's "Varsity Blues". Voight played a blunt, autocratic football coach, pitted in a test of wills against his star player, portrayed by James Van Der Beek. Produced by fledgling MTV Pictures, the film became a surprise hit and helped connect Voight with a younger audience.

Voight played Noah in the 1999 television production "Noah's Ark", and appeared in "Second String," also for TV. He also appeared with Cheryl Ladd in the feature "A Dog of Flanders", a remake of a popular film set in Belgium.

Voight next portrayed President Franklin D. Roosevelt in 2001's action/war film "Pearl Harbor", having accepted the role when Gene Hackman declined (his performance was received favorably by critics). Also that year, he appeared as Lord Croft, father of the title character of "". Based on the popular video game, the digital adventuress was played on the big screen by Voight's own real-life daughter Angelina Jolie.

That year, he also appeared in "Zoolander", directed by Ben Stiller who starred as the title character, a vapid supermodel with humble roots. Voight appeared as Zoolander's coal-miner father. The film extracted both pathos and cruel humor from the scenes of Zoolander's return home, when he entered the mines alongside his father and brothers and Voight's character expressed his unspoken disgust at his son's chosen profession.

Also in 2001, Voight joined Leelee Sobieski, Hank Azaria and David Schwimmer in the made-for-television film "Uprising", which was based on the uprising in the Warsaw ghetto. Voight played Major-General Juergen Stroop, the German officer responsible for the destruction of the Jewish resistance, and received a Primetime Emmy Award nomination for Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Limited Series or Movie

Director Michael Mann tagged Voight for a supporting role in the 2001 biopic "Ali", which starred Will Smith as the controversial former heavyweight champ, Muhammad Ali. Voight was almost unrecognizable under his make-up and toupée, as he impersonated the sports broadcaster Howard Cosell. Voight received his fourth Academy Award nomination, this time for Best Actor in a Supporting Role, for his performance.

Also in 2001, he appeared in the television mini-series "" along with Vanessa Redgrave, Matthew Modine, Richard Attenborough, and Mia Sara.

In the CBS miniseries "Pope John Paul II", released in December 2005, Voight, who was raised a Catholic, portrayed the pontiff from the time of his election until his death, garnering an Emmy nomination for the role.

In 2003, he played the role of Marion Sevillo/Mr. Sir in "Holes". In 2004, Voight joined Nicolas Cage, in "National Treasure" as Patrick Gates, the father of Cage's character. In 2005, he played Pope John Paul II in the second part of CBS' miniseries, "Pope John Paul II". In 2006, he was Kentucky Wildcats head coach Adolph Rupp in the Disney hit "Glory Road". In 2007, he played United States Secretary of Defense John Keller in the summer blockbuster "Transformers", reuniting him with "Holes" star Shia LaBeouf. Also in 2007, Voight reprised his role as Patrick Gates in "".

In 2009, Voight played Jonas Hodges, the American antagonist, in the seventh season of the hit Fox drama "24", a role that many argue is based on real life figures Alfried Krupp, Johann Rall and Erik Prince. Voight plays the chief executive officer of a fictional private military company based in northern Virginia called "Starkwood", which has loose resemblances to Academi and ThyssenKrupp. Voight made his first appearance in the two-hour prequel episode "" on November 23. He then went on to recur for 10 episodes of Season 7. He joined Dennis Haysbert as the only two actors ever to have been credited with the "Special Guest Appearance" card on "24". That same year Voight also lent his voice talents in the Thomas Nelson audio Bible production known as "The Word of Promise". In this dramatized audio, Voight played the character of Abraham. The project also featured a large ensemble of other well known Hollywood actors including Jim Caviezel, Lou Gossett, Jr., John Rhys-Davies, Luke Perry, Gary Sinise, Jason Alexander, Christopher McDonald, Marissa Tomei, and John Schneider.

In 2013 Voight made his much acclaimed appearance on "Ray Donovan" as Mickey Donovan, Ray's estranged pseudo-evil crudely charismatic highly persuasively endearing father who brought nothing to his sons' lives but paranoia, neurosis, and disastrous complications. Under the category Television Series Voight received a Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actor – Series, Miniseries or Television Film in 2013.

In his early life, his political views aligned with American liberal views and he supported President John F. Kennedy, whose death traumatized him. He also worked for George McGovern's voter registrations efforts in the inner cities of Los Angeles. Voight actively protested against the Vietnam War. In the 1970s, he made public appearances alongside Jane Fonda and Leonard Bernstein in support of the leftist Unidad Popular group in Chile.

However, in later years, Voight adopted conservative viewpoints. In a July 28, 2008 op-ed in the "Washington Times," he wrote that he regretted his youthful anti-war activism, calling it the result of "Marxist propaganda". He pointed in particular to the massive human rights abuses in Vietnam and Cambodia after the American withdrawal.

In May 2008, Voight paid a solidarity visit to Israel in honor of its 70th birthday. "I'm coming to salute, encourage and strengthen the people of Israel on this joyous 70th birthday", said Voight. "This week is about highlighting Israel as a moral beacon. At a time when its enemies threaten nuclear destruction, Israel heals." On July 28, 2008, he wrote an editorial in "The Washington Times" critical of then-Democratic presidential candidate Barack Obama.

Voight endorsed Republican presidential nominees Mitt Romney and Donald Trump in the 2012 and 2016 presidential elections respectively.



</doc>
<doc id="4010" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4010" title="Bing Crosby">
Bing Crosby

Harry Lillis "Bing" Crosby Jr. (; May 3, 1903 – October 14, 1977) was an American singer and actor. Crosby's trademark warm bass-baritone voice made him one of the best-selling recording artists of all time, having sold over one billion analog records and tapes, as well as digital compact discs and downloads around the world.

The first multimedia star, from 1931 to 1954 Crosby was a leader in record sales, radio ratings, and motion picture grosses. His early career coincided with technical recording innovations such as the microphone. This allowed him to develop a laid-back, intimate singing style that influenced many of the popular male singers who followed him, including Perry Como, Frank Sinatra, Dick Haymes, and Dean Martin. "Yank" magazine said that he was the person who had done the most for American soldiers' morale during World War II. In 1948, American polls declared him the "most admired man alive", ahead of Jackie Robinson and Pope Pius XII. Also in 1948, "Music Digest" estimated that his recordings filled more than half of the 80,000 weekly hours allocated to recorded radio music.

Crosby won an Academy Award for Best Actor for his role as Father Chuck O'Malley in the 1944 motion picture "Going My Way" and was nominated for his reprise of the role in "The Bells of St. Mary's" opposite Ingrid Bergman the next year, becoming the first of six actors to be nominated twice for playing the same character. In 1963, Crosby received the first Grammy Global Achievement Award. He is one of 33 people to have three stars on the Hollywood Walk of Fame, in the categories of motion pictures, radio, and audio recording.

Crosby influenced the development of the postwar recording industry. After seeing a demonstration of an early Ampex reel-to-reel tape recorder he placed a large order for their equipment and convinced ABC to allow him to tape his shows. He became the first performer to pre-record his radio shows and master his commercial recordings onto magnetic tape. Through the medium of recording, he constructed his radio programs with the same directorial tools and craftsmanship (editing, retaking, rehearsal, time shifting) used in motion picture production, a practice that became an industry standard. In addition to his work with early audio tape recording, he helped to finance the development of videotape, bought television stations, bred racehorses, and co-owned the Pittsburgh Pirates baseball team.

Crosby was born on May 3, 1903 in Tacoma, Washington, in a house his father built at 1112 North J Street. In 1906, his family moved to Spokane, and in 1913, his father built a house at 508 E. Sharp Avenue. The house sits on the campus of Gonzaga University, his alma mater.

He was the fourth of seven children: brothers Larry (1895–1975), Edward (1896–1966), Ted (1900–1973), and Bob (1913–1993); and two sisters, Catherine (1904–1974) and Mary Rose (1906–1990). His parents were Harry Lillis Crosby Sr. (1870–1950), a bookkeeper, and Catherine Helen "Kate" (née Harrigan; 1873–1964). His mother was a second generation Irish-American. His father was of English descent; an ancestor, Simon Crosby, emigrated to America in the 17th century, and one of his descendants married a descendant of "Mayflower" passenger William Brewster (c. 1567 – April 10, 1644).

In 1910, seven-year-old Harry Crosby, Jr. was forever renamed. The Sunday edition of the "Spokesman-Review" published a feature called "The Bingville Bugle". Written by humorist Newton Newkirk, "The Bingville Bugle" was a parody of a hillbilly newsletter, filled with gossip, minstrel quips, creative spelling, and mock ads. A Crosby neighbor, 15-year-old Valentine Hobart, enjoyed reading "The Bugle", and noting Harry's laugh, took a liking to him and called him "Bingo from Bingville". Eventually, the last vowel was dropped and the nickname stuck.

In 1917, Crosby took a summer job as property boy at Spokane's "Auditorium," where he witnessed some of the finest acts of the day, including Al Jolson, who held him spellbound with ad libbing and parodies of Hawaiian songs. He later described Jolson's delivery as "electric."

Crosby graduated from Gonzaga High School (today's Gonzaga Prep) in 1920 and enrolled at Gonzaga University. He attended Gonzaga for three years but did not earn a degree. As a freshman, he played on the university's baseball team. The university granted him an honorary doctorate in 1937.

In 1923, Crosby was invited to join a new band composed of high school students a few years younger than himself. Al Rinker, Miles Rinker, James Heaton, Claire Pritchard and Robert Pritchard, along with drummer Crosby, formed the Musicaladers, who performed at dances both for high school students and club-goers. The group performed on Spokane radio station KHQ, but disbanded after two years. Crosby and Al Rinker then obtained work at the Clemmer Theatre in Spokane (now known as the Bing Crosby Theater). Crosby was initially a member of a vocal trio called 'The Three Harmony Aces' with Al Rinker accompanying on piano from the pit, to entertain between the films. Bing and Al continued at the Clemmer Theatre for several months often with three other men – Wee Georgie Crittenden, Frank McBride and Lloyd Grinnell – and they were billed as 'The Clemmer Trio' or 'The Clemmer Entertainers' depending who performed.

In October 1925, Crosby and his partner Al Rinker, brother of singer Mildred Bailey, decided to seek fame in California. They traveled to Los Angeles where they met up with Mildred Bailey. She introduced them to her show business contacts, and the Fanchon and Marco Time Agency hired them for thirteen weeks for a revue called The Syncopation Idea, starting at the Boulevard Theater in Los Angeles and then on the Loew's circuit. They each earned $75 a week. Bing and Al Rinker began as a minor part of The Syncopation Idea and it was there that they started to develop as entertainers. They had a lively and individual style and were particularly popular with college students. After The Syncopation Idea closed, Bing and Al worked in the Will Morrissey Music Hall Revue. They further honed their skills with Morrissey, and blossomed when they subsequently had the chance to present their own independent act, and were quickly spotted by the Paul Whiteman organization. At that time, it was felt that Whiteman needed something different and entertaining to break up his musical selections, and Crosby and Rinker filled this requirement. After less than a year in full-time show business, they had become part of one of the biggest names in the entertainment world. Hired for $150 a week in 1926, they debuted with Whiteman on December 6 at the Tivoli Theatre in Chicago. Their first recording, in October 1926, was "I've Got the Girl", with Don Clark's Orchestra, but the Columbia-issued record did them no vocal favors, as it was inadvertently recorded at a speed slower than it should have been, which increased the singers' pitch when played at 78 rpm. Throughout his career, Crosby often credited Mildred Bailey for getting him his first important job in the entertainment business.

Initial successes with Whiteman were followed by disaster when they reached New York and Whiteman considered letting them go. Bing may have been retained as Whiteman was already using him as a solo performer on record, but the prospects for Rinker were bleak. However, the addition of pianist and aspiring songwriter Harry Barris made the difference and "The Rhythm Boys" were born. The additional voice meant the boys could be heard more easily in the large New York theaters and eventually became a success. A year touring with Whiteman performing and recording with musicians Bix Beiderbecke, Jack Teagarden, Tommy Dorsey, Jimmy Dorsey, Eddie Lang and Hoagy Carmichael, provided valuable experience and began touring. Crosby then matured considerably as a performer and was in constant demand as a solo artist.

Crosby soon became the star attraction of the Rhythm Boys, and in 1928 he had his first number one hit with the Whiteman orchestra, a jazz-influenced rendition of "Ol' Man River". In 1929, the Rhythm Boys appeared in the film The King of Jazz with Whiteman but Bing's growing dissatisfaction with Whiteman led to the Rhythm Boys leaving his organization. They joined the Gus Arnheim Orchestra performing nightly in The Coconut Grove of the Ambassador Hotel. Singing with the Arnheim Orchestra, Bing's solos began to steal the show, while the Rhythm Boys act gradually became redundant. Harry Barris wrote several of Crosby's subsequent hits including "At Your Command", "I Surrender Dear", and "Wrap Your Troubles In Dreams". In the early months of 1931, a solo recording contract came Bing's way, Mack Sennett signed him to make film shorts and a break with the Rhythm Boys became almost inevitable. Bing had married Dixie Lee in September 1930 and after a threatened divorce in March 1931, he started to apply himself seriously to his career. His gramophone records in 1931 broke new ground as his powerful and emotional singing started to change the face of popular music forever.

Their low salaries at the Cocoanut Grove of the Ambassador Hotel had led the Rhythm Boys to walk out, causing union problems for Bing. Bing's brother, Everett, interested Bill Paley of CBS in his brother and Paley beckoned Bing to come to New York. A settlement was reached with the Ambassador Hotel and Bing made his first solo national radio broadcast in September 1931 and then went on to star at the New York Paramount Theatre.

On September 2, 1931, Crosby made his solo radio debut. Before the end of the year, he signed with both Brunswick Records and CBS Radio. Doing a weekly 15-minute radio broadcast, Crosby quickly became a huge hit. His songs "Out of Nowhere", "Just One More Chance", "At Your Command" and "I Found a Million Dollar Baby (in a Five and Ten Cent Store)" were all among the best selling songs of 1931.

As the 1930s unfolded, Crosby became the leading singer in America. Ten of the top 50 songs for 1931 featured Crosby, either solo or with others. A so-called "Battle of the Baritones" with singing star Russ Columbo proved short-lived, replaced with the slogan "Bing Was King". Crosby played the lead in a series of sound-era musical comedy short films for Mack Sennett, signed with Paramount and starred in his first full-length feature, 1932's "The Big Broadcast", the first of 55 films in which he received top billing. He would appear in 79 pictures, and signed a long-term deal with Jack Kapp's new record company Decca in late 1934.

His first commercial sponsor on radio was Cremo Cigars and increasingly his fame spread nationwide. After a long run in New York, Bing went back to Hollywood to film "The Big Broadcast" and his personal appearances, his records, and his radio work substantially increased his impact. The success of his first full-length film brought him a contract with Paramount and he began a regular pattern of making three films a year. On radio, he fronted his own show for Woodbury Soap for two seasons and gradually his live appearances dwindled. His records produced hit after hit at a time when record sales generally were in decline because of the Depression. Critically acclaimed audio engineer Steve Hoffman once stated: "By the way, Bing actually saved the record business in 1934 when he agreed to support Decca founder Jack Kapp's crazy idea of lowering the price of singles from a dollar to 35 cents and getting a royalty for records sold instead of a flat fee. Bing's name and his artistry saved the recording industry. All the other artists signed to Decca after Bing did. Without him, Jack Kapp wouldn't have had a chance in hell of making Decca work and the Great Depression would have wiped out phonograph records for good." His social life was hectic, his first son Gary was born in 1933 with twin boys following in 1934. By 1936, he'd replaced his former boss, Paul Whiteman, as host of the prestigious NBC radio program "Kraft Music Hall", the weekly radio program where he remained for the next ten years. "Where the Blue of the Night (Meets the Gold of the Day)", which showcased one of his then-trademark whistling interludes, became his theme song and signature tune.

Also in 1936, Crosby exercised an option from Paramount to make a film out-of-house. Quickly signed to a one-picture agreement with Columbia, Crosby dreamt of having his icon and friend Louis Armstrong, an African-American, who largely influenced his singing style, in a screen adaptation of "The Peacock Feather" called "Pennies from Heaven". Crosby talked to Harry Cohn about the matter, but he disagreed saying: "... no reason to entail the expense of flying him in and having no desire to negotiate with Armstrong's crude, mob-linked but devoted manager, Joe Glaser." Bing threatened to walk out on the film and refused to discuss it with Cohn. Armstrong's musical scenes, along with some comical dialogue as well, heightened his career. Bing also had it that Armstrong made high billing alongside his white co-stars, one of the first times ever for a black performer in a wide-audience film. He starred as himself in many more films to come and had a large appreciation for Bing's unracist views, often thanking him in his later years.

Crosby's much-imitated style helped take popular singing beyond the kind of "belting" associated with boisterous performers like Al Jolson and Billy Murray, who had been obliged to reach the back seats in New York theaters without the aid of the microphone. As Henry Pleasants noted in "The Great American Popular Singers", something new had entered American music, a style that might be called "singing in American" with conversational ease. This new sound led to the popular epithet "crooner".

During the Second World War, Crosby made numerous live appearances before American troops fighting in the European Theater. He also learned how to pronounce German from written scripts and would read propaganda broadcasts intended for the German forces. The nickname "Der Bingle" was common among Crosby's German listeners and came to be used by his English-speaking fans. In a poll of U.S. troops at the close of World War II, Crosby topped the list as the person who had done the most for G.I. morale, ahead of President Franklin Delano Roosevelt, General Dwight Eisenhower, and Bob Hope.

The June 18, 1945, issue of "Life" magazine stated: "America's number one star, Bing Crosby, has won more fans, made more money than any entertainer in history. Today he is a kind of national institution." They also state: "In all, 60,000,000 Crosby disks have been marketed since he made his first record in 1931. His biggest best seller is White Christmas, 2,000,000 impressions of which have been sold in the U.S. and 250,000 in Great Britain." They go on to say: "Nine out of ten singers and bandleaders listen to Crosby's broadcasts each Thursday night and follow his lead. The day after he sings a song over the air – any song – some 50,000 copies of it are sold throughout the U.S. Time and again Crosby has taken some new or unknown ballad, has given it what is known in trade circles as the "big goose" and made it a hit single-handed and overnight." and "Precisely what the future holds for Crosby neither his family nor his friends can conjecture. He has achieved greater popularity, made more money, attracted vaster audiences than any other entertainer in history. And his star is still in the ascendant. His contract with Decca runs until 1955. His contract with Paramount runs until 1954. Records which he made ten years ago are selling better than ever before. The nation's appetite for Crosby's voice and personality appears insatiable. To soldiers overseas and to foreigners he has become a kind of symbol of America, of the amiable, humorous citizen of a free land. Crosby, however, seldom bothers to contemplate his future. For one thing, he enjoys hearing himself sing, and if ever a day should dawn when the public wearies of him, he will complacently go right on singing – to himself."

The biggest hit song of Crosby's career was his recording of Irving Berlin's "White Christmas", which he introduced on a Christmas Day radio broadcast in 1941. (A copy of the recording from the radio program is owned by the estate of Bing Crosby and was loaned to "CBS Sunday Morning" for their December 25, 2011, program.) The song then appeared in his 1942 movie "Holiday Inn". His record hit the charts on October 3, 1942, and rose to No. 1 on October 31, where it stayed for 11 weeks. A holiday perennial, the song was repeatedly re-released by Decca, charting another 16 times. It topped the charts again in 1945 and for a third time in January 1947. The song remains the bestselling single of all time. According to "Guinness World Records", his recording of "White Christmas" has sold over 100 million copies around the world, with at least 50 million sales as singles. His recording was so popular that he was obliged to re-record it in 1947 using the same musicians and backup singers; the original 1942 master had become damaged due to its frequent use in pressing additional singles. Though the two versions are similar, the 1947 recording is more familiar today. After his death in 1977, the song was re-released and reached the No. 5 position in the UK Singles Chart in December 1977. Crosby was dismissive of his role in the song's success, saying "a jackdaw with a cleft palate could have sung it successfully."

Crosby starred with Bob Hope and Dorothy Lamour in seven "Road to" musical comedies between 1940 and 1962, cementing Crosby and Hope as an on-and-off duo, despite never officially declaring themselves a "team" in the sense that Laurel and Hardy or Dean Martin and Jerry Lewis were teams. The series consists of "Road to Singapore" (1940), "Road to Zanzibar" (1941), "Road to Morocco" (1942), "Road to Utopia" (1946), "Road to Rio" (1947), "Road to Bali" (1952), and "The Road to Hong Kong" (1962). When they appeared solo, Crosby and Hope frequently made note of the other in a comically insulting fashion. They performed together many times on stage, radio, film, and television.
In the 1949 Disney animated film "The Adventures of Ichabod and Mr. Toad", Crosby provided the narration and song vocals for "The Legend of Sleepy Hollow" segment, and again in the October 1977 animated Disney film "The Many Adventures of Ichabod and Winnie the Pooh".

In 1960, he starred in "High Time", a collegiate comedy with Fabian Forte and Tuesday Weld that predicted the emerging gap between him and the new young generation of musicians and actors who had begun their careers after WWII. The following year, Crosby and Hope reunited for one more "Road" movie, "The Road to Hong Kong", which teamed them up with the much younger Joan Collins and Peter Sellers. Collins was used in place of their longtime partner Dorothy Lamour, whom Crosby felt was getting too old for the role, though Hope refused to do the movie without her, and she instead made a cameo appearance. Shortly before his death in 1977, he had planned another "Road" film in which he, Hope, and Lamour search for the Fountain of Youth.

He won an Academy Award for Best Actor for "Going My Way" in 1944 and was nominated for the 1945 sequel, "The Bells of St. Mary's". He received critical acclaim for his performance as an alcoholic entertainer in "The Country Girl" and received his third Academy Award nomination.

In 1958, Crosby and his brother helped produce a pornographic film for the CIA. An actor was fitted with a latex face mask of the President of Indonesia Sukarno and filmed performing sex acts on a blonde woman, which was used by the CIA to imply that Sukarno had been seduced by an agent of the KGB.

"The Fireside Theater" (1950) was his first television production. The series of 26-minute shows was filmed at Hal Roach Studios rather than performed live on the air. The "telefilms" were syndicated to individual television stations. He was a frequent guest on the musical variety shows of the 1950s and 1960s. He was associated with ABC's "The Hollywood Palace". He was the show's first and most frequent guest host and appeared annually on its Christmas edition with his wife Kathryn and his younger children. In the early 1970s, he made two late appearances on the "Flip Wilson Show", singing duets with the comedian. His last TV appearance was a Christmas special filmed in London in September 1977 and aired weeks after his death. It was on this special that he recorded a duet of "The Little Drummer Boy" and "Peace on Earth" with rock star David Bowie. Their duet was released in 1982 as a single 45-rpm record and reached No. 3 in the UK singles charts. It has since become a staple of holiday radio and the final popular hit of Crosby's career. At the end of the 20th century, "TV Guide" listed the Crosby-Bowie duet as one of the 25 most memorable musical moments of 20th-century television.

Bing Crosby Productions, affiliated with Desilu Studios and later CBS Television Studios, produced a number of television series, including Crosby's own unsuccessful ABC sitcom "The Bing Crosby Show" in the 1964–1965 season (with co-stars Beverly Garland and Frank McHugh). The company produced two ABC medical dramas, "Ben Casey" (1961–1966) and "Breaking Point" (1963–1964), the popular "Hogan's Heroes" (1965–1971) military comedy on CBS, as well as the lesser-known show "Slattery's People" (1964–1965).

Crosby was one of the first singers to exploit the intimacy of the microphone, rather than using the deep, loud "vaudeville style" associated with Al Jolson and others. He was, by his own definition, a "phraser" or a singer who placed equal emphasis on both the lyrics and the music. Crosby's love and appreciation of jazz music helped bring the genre to a wider mainstream audience. Within the framework of the novelty-singing style of the Rhythm Boys, Crosby bent notes and added off-tune phrasing, an approach that was firmly rooted in jazz. He had already been introduced to Louis Armstrong and Bessie Smith prior to his first appearance on record. Crosby and Armstrong would remain professionally friendly for decades, notably in the 1956 film "High Society", where they sang the duet "Now You Has Jazz".

During the early portion of his solo career (about 1931–1934), Crosby's emotional, often pleading style of crooning was widely popular. But Jack Kapp (manager of Brunswick and later Decca) talked Crosby into dropping many of his jazzier mannerisms, in favor of a straight-ahead clear vocal style. Crosby credited Kapp for choosing hit songs, working with many other artists, and most importantly, diversifying his repertoire into various styles and genres. This approach's wide appeal helped Crosby become highly successful, charting number-one hits in the genres of Christmas music, Hawaiian music and Country music, as well as top-thirty hits in Irish music, French music, Rhythm and blues, as well as Ballad songs.
Crosby also elaborated on a further idea of Al Jolson's: phrasing, or the art of making a song's lyric ring true. His success in doing so was influential. "I used to tell Sinatra over and over," said Tommy Dorsey, "there's only one singer you ought to listen to and his name is Crosby. All that matters to him is the words, and that's the only thing that ought to for you, too."

Vocal critic Henry Pleasants wrote:
[While] the octave B flat to B flat in Bing's voice at that time [1930s] is, to my ears, one of the loveliest I have heard in forty-five years of listening to baritones, both classical and popular, it dropped conspicuously in later years. From the mid-1950s, Bing was more comfortable in a bass range while maintaining a baritone quality, with the best octave being G to G, or even F to F. In a recording he made of 'Dardanella' with Louis Armstrong in 1960, he attacks lightly and easily on a low E flat. This is lower than most opera basses care to venture, and they tend to sound as if they were in the cellar when they get there.

Crosby's was among the most popular and successful musical acts of the 20th century. Although "Billboard" magazine operated under different methodologies for the bulk of Crosby's career, his chart numbers remain astonishing: 396 chart singles, including 41 No. 1 hits. If the multiple times "White Christmas" charted are counted, that would bring that number up to 43 – more than The Beatles and Elvis combined. Crosby had separate charting singles in every calendar year between 1931 and 1954; the annual re-release of "White Christmas" extended that streak to 1957. He had 24 separate popular singles in 1939 alone. Crosby may have been the best selling recording artist ever, with up to 1 billion units sold. Statistician Joel Whitburn at "Billboard" determined that Crosby was America's most successful recording act of the 1930s and again in the 1940s.

For 15 years (1934, 1937, 1940, 1943–1954), Crosby was among the top 10 in box-office drawing power, and for five of those years (1944–1948) he topped the world. He sang four Academy Award-winning songs – "Sweet Leilani" (1937), "White Christmas" (1942), "Swinging on a Star" (1944), "In the Cool, Cool, Cool of the Evening" (1951) – and won the Academy Award for Best Actor for his role in "Going My Way" (1944).

A survey in 2000 found that with 1,077,900,000 movie tickets sold, Crosby was the third most popular actor of all time, behind Clark Gable (1,168,300,000) and John Wayne (1,114,000,000). The "International Motion Picture Almanac" lists him in a tie for second on the "All Time Number One Stars List" with Clint Eastwood, Tom Hanks, and Burt Reynolds. His most popular film, "White Christmas", grossed $30 million in 1954 ($ million in current value).

He received 23 gold and platinum records, according to the book "Million Selling Records". The Recording Industry Association of America did not institute its gold record certification program until 1958, by which point Crosby's record sales were barely a blip. Before that, gold records were awarded by an artist's own record company. Universal Music, current owner of Crosby's Decca catalog, has never requested RIAA certification for any of his hit singles.

Crosby charted 23 "Billboard" hits from 47 recorded songs with the Andrews Sisters, whose Decca record sales were second only to Crosby's throughout the 1940s. Patty, Maxene, and LaVerne were his most frequent collaborators on disc from 1939 to 1952—a partnership that produced four million-selling singles: "Pistol Packin' Mama", "Jingle Bells", "Don't Fence Me In", and "South America, Take it Away". They made one film appearance together in "Road to Rio" singing "You Don't Have to Know the Language", and sang together countless times on radio shows throughout the 1940s and 1950s. They appeared as guests on each other's shows quite often, as well as on many shows for the Armed Forces Radio Service during and after World War II. The quartet's Top-10 "Billboard" hits from 1943 to 1945 including "The Vict'ry Polka", "There'll Be a Hot Time in the Town of Berlin (When the Yanks Go Marching In)", and "Is You Is or Is You Ain't (Ma' Baby?)" were major morale-boosters for the American public during the war years.

In 1962, Crosby was given the Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award. He has been inducted into the halls of fame for both radio and popular music. In 2007 Crosby was inducted into the Hit Parade Hall of Fame, and in 2008 into the Western Music Hall of Fame.

During the Golden Age of Radio, performers had to create their shows live, sometimes even redoing the program a second time for the west coast time zone. Crosby's radio career took a significant turn in 1945, when he clashed with NBC over his insistence that he be allowed to pre-record his radio shows. (The live production of radio shows was also reinforced by the musicians' union and ASCAP, which wanted to ensure continued work for their members.) In "On the Air: The Encyclopedia of Old-Time Radio", historian John Dunning wrote about German engineers having developed a tape recorder with a near-professional broadcast quality standard:
[Crosby saw] an enormous advantage in prerecording his radio shows. The scheduling could now be done at the star's convenience. He could do four shows a week, if he chose, and then take a month off. But the networks and sponsors were adamantly opposed. The public wouldn't stand for 'canned' radio, the networks argued. There was something magic for listeners in the fact that what they were hearing was being performed and heard everywhere, at that precise instant. Some of the best moments in comedy came when a line was blown and the star had to rely on wit to rescue a bad situation. Fred Allen, Jack Benny, Phil Harris, and also Crosby were masters at this, and the networks weren't about to give it up easily.

Crosby's insistence eventually factored into the further development of magnetic tape sound recording and the radio industry's widespread adoption of it. He used his clout, both professional and financial, to innovate new methods of reproducing audio of his performances. But NBC (and competitor CBS) were also insistent, refusing to air prerecorded radio programs. Crosby walked away from the network and stayed off the air for seven months, creating a legal battle with Kraft, his sponsor, that was settled out of court. Crosby returned to the air for the last 13 weeks of the 1945–1946 season.

The Mutual network, on the other hand, had pre-recorded some of its programs as early as the 1938 run of "The Shadow" with Orson Welles. And the new ABC network, which had been formed out of the sale of the old NBC Blue Network in 1943 following a federal anti-trust action, was willing to join Mutual in breaking the tradition. ABC offered Crosby $30,000 per week to produce a recorded show every Wednesday that would be sponsored by Philco. He would also get an additional $40,000 from 400 independent stations for the rights to broadcast the 30-minute show, which was sent to them every Monday on three 16-inch lacquer discs that played ten minutes per side at 33⅓ rpm.

Crosby wanted to change to recorded production for several reasons. The legend that has been most often told is that it would give him more time for his golf game. And he did record his first Philco program in August 1947 so he could enter the Jasper National Park Invitational Golf Tournament in September, just when the new radio season was to start. But golf was not the most important reason.

Though Crosby did want more time to tend to his other business and leisure activities, he also sought better quality through recording, including being able to eliminate mistakes and control the timing of his show performances. Because his own Bing Crosby Enterprises produced the show, he could purchase the latest and best sound equipment and arrange the microphones his way; the logistics of microphone placement had long been a hotly debated issue in every recording studio since the beginning of the electrical era. No longer would he have to wear the hated toupee on his head previously required by CBS and NBC for his live audience shows (he preferred a hat). He could also record short promotions for his latest investment, the world's first frozen orange juice, sold under the brand name Minute Maid. This investment allowed Crosby to make more money by finding a loophole whereby the IRS couldn't tax him at a 77% rate.

Murdo MacKenzie of Bing Crosby Enterprises had seen a demonstration of the German Magnetophon in June 1947—the same device that Jack Mullin had brought back from Radio Frankfurt, along with 50 reels of tape, at the end of the war. It was one of the magnetic tape recorders that BASF and AEG had built in Germany starting in 1935. The 6.5mm ferric-oxide-coated tape could record 20 minutes per reel of high-quality sound. Alexander M. Poniatoff ordered his Ampex company, which he'd founded in 1944, to manufacture an improved version of the Magnetophone.

Crosby hired Mullin to start recording his "Philco Radio Time" show on his German-made machine in August 1947, using the same 50 reels of I.G. Farben magnetic tape that Mullin had found at a radio station at Bad Nauheim near Frankfurt while working for the U.S. Army Signal Corps. The crucial advantage was editing. As Crosby wrote in his autobiography:
By using tape, I could do a thirty-five or forty-minute show, then edit it down to the twenty-six or twenty-seven minutes the program ran. In that way, we could take out jokes, gags, or situations that didn't play well and finish with only the prime meat of the show; the solid stuff that played big. We could also take out the songs that didn't sound good. It gave us a chance to first try a recording of the songs in the afternoon without an audience, then another one in front of a studio audience. We'd dub the one that came off best into the final transcription. It gave us a chance to ad lib as much as we wanted, knowing that excess ad libbing could be sliced from the final product. If I made a mistake in singing a song or in the script, I could have some fun with it, then retain any of the fun that sounded amusing.

Mullin's 1976 memoir of these early days of experimental recording agrees with Crosby's account:
In the evening, Crosby did the whole show before an audience. If he muffed a song then, the audience loved it—thought it was very funny—but we would have to take out the show version and put in one of the rehearsal takes. Sometimes, if Crosby was having fun with a song and not really working at it, we had to make it up out of two or three parts. This ad lib way of working is commonplace in the recording studios today, but it was all new to us.

Crosby invested US$50,000 in Ampex with an eye towards producing more machines. In 1948, the second season of Philco shows was taped with the new Ampex Model 200 tape recorder using the new Scotch 111 tape from the Minnesota Mining and Manufacturing (3M) company. Mullin explained how one new broadcasting technique was invented on the Crosby show with these machines:
One time Bob Burns, the hillbilly comic, was on the show, and he threw in a few of his folksy farm stories, which of course were not in Bill Morrow's script. Today they wouldn't seem very off-color, but things were different on radio then. They got enormous laughs, which just went on and on. We couldn't use the jokes, but Bill asked us to save the laughs. A couple of weeks later he had a show that wasn't very funny, and he insisted that we put in the salvaged laughs. Thus the laugh-track was born.
Crosby had launched the tape recorder revolution in America. In his 1950 film "Mr. Music", Crosby is seen singing into one of the new Ampex tape recorders that reproduced his voice better than anything else. Also quick to adopt tape recording was his friend Bob Hope. He gave one of the first Ampex Model 300 recorders to his friend, musician Les Paul, which led directly to Paul's invention of multitrack recording. His organization, the Crosby Research Foundation, also held various tape recording patents and developed equipment and recording techniques such as the laugh track that are still in use today.

Along with Frank Sinatra, Crosby was also one of the principal backers behind the famous United Western Recorders recording studio complex in Los Angeles.

Mullin continued to work for Crosby to develop a videotape recorder (VTR). Television production was mostly live television in its early years, but Crosby wanted the same ability to record that he had achieved in radio. 1950's "The Fireside Theater", sponsored by Procter & Gamble, was his first television production. Mullin had not yet succeeded with videotape, so Crosby filmed the series of 26-minute shows at the Hal Roach Studios, and the "telefilms" were syndicated to individual television stations.

Crosby continued to finance the development of videotape. Bing Crosby Enterprises (BCE) gave the world's first demonstration of videotape recording in Los Angeles on November 11, 1951. Developed by John T. Mullin and Wayne R. Johnson since 1950, the device aired what were described as "blurred and indistinct" images, using a modified Ampex 200 tape recorder and standard quarter-inch (6.3 mm) audio tape moving at 360 inches (9.1 m) per second.

A Crosby-led group purchased station KCOP-TV, in Los Angeles, California, in 1954. NAFI Corporation and Crosby together purchased the television station KPTV, in Portland, Oregon, for $4 million on September 1, 1959. In 1960, NAFI purchased KCOP from Crosby's group. In the early 1950s, Crosby helped establish the CBS television affiliate in his hometown of Spokane, Washington. He partnered with Ed Craney, who owned the CBS radio affiliate, KXLY (AM), and built a television studio just west of Crosby's alma mater, Gonzaga University. Once it begin broadcasting, the station was sold within the year to Northern Pacific Radio and Television Corp.

Crosby was a fan of thoroughbred horse racing and bought his first racehorse in 1935. In 1937, he became a founding partner of the Del Mar Thoroughbred Club and a member of its Board of Directors. Operating from the Del Mar Racetrack at Del Mar, California, the group included millionaire businessman Charles S. Howard, who owned a successful racing stable that included Seabiscuit. Charles' son, Lindsay C. Howard became one of Crosby's closest friends; Crosby named his son Lindsay after him, and would purchase his 40-room Hillsborough, California estate from Lindsay in 1965.

Crosby and Lindsay Howard formed Binglin Stable to race and breed thoroughbred horses at a ranch in Moorpark in Ventura County, California. They also established the Binglin stock farm in Argentina, where they raced horses at Hipódromo de Palermo in Palermo, Buenos Aires. A number of Argentine-bred horses were purchased and shipped to race in the United States. On August 12, 1938, the Del Mar Thoroughbred Club hosted a $25,000 winner-take-all match race won by Charles S. Howard's Seabiscuit over Binglin's horse Ligaroti. In 1943, Binglin's horse Don Bingo won the Suburban Handicap at Belmont Park in Elmont, New York.

The Binglin Stable partnership came to an end in 1953 as a result of a liquidation of assets by Crosby, who needed to raise enough funds to pay the hefty federal and state inheritance taxes on his deceased wife's estate. The Bing Crosby Breeders' Cup Handicap at Del Mar Racetrack is named in his honor.

Crosby was also a co-owner of the British colt Meadow Court, with jockey Johnny Longden's friend Max Bell. Meadow Court won the 1965 King George VI and Queen Elizabeth Stakes, and the Irish Derby. In the Irish Derby's winner's circle at the Curragh, Crosby sang "When Irish Eyes Are Smiling".

Though Crosby's stables had some success, he often joked about his horse racing failures as part of his radio appearances. "Crosby's horse finally came in" became a running gag.

Crosby had an interest in sports. In the 1930s, his friend and former college classmate, Gonzaga head coach Mike Pecarovich appointed Crosby as an assistant football coach. From 1946 until his death, he owned a 25% share of the Pittsburgh Pirates. Although he was passionate about the team, he was too nervous to watch the deciding Game 7 of the 1960 World Series, choosing to go to Paris with Kathryn and listen to its radio broadcast. Crosby had arranged for Ampex, another of his financial investments, to record the NBC telecast on kinescope. The game was one of the most famous in baseball history, capped off by Bill Mazeroski's walk-off home run. He apparently viewed the complete film just once, and then stored it in his wine cellar, where it remained undisturbed until it was discovered in December 2009. The restored broadcast was shown on MLB Network in December 2010.

Crosby was also an avid golfer, and in 1978, he and Bob Hope were voted the Bob Jones Award, the highest honor given by the United States Golf Association in recognition of distinguished sportsmanship. He is a member of the World Golf Hall of Fame. In 1937, Crosby hosted the first 'Crosby Clambake' as it was popularly known, at Rancho Santa Fe Golf Club in Rancho Santa Fe, California, the event's location prior to World War II. Sam Snead won the first tournament, in which the first place check was for $500. After the war, the event resumed play in 1947 on golf courses in Pebble Beach, where it has been played ever since. Now the AT&T Pebble Beach Pro-Am, it has been a leading event in the world of professional golf.

Crosby first took up golf at 12 as a caddy, dropped it, and started again in 1930 with some fellow cast members in Hollywood during the filming of "The King of Jazz". Crosby was accomplished at the sport, with a two handicap. He competed in both the British and U.S. Amateur championships, was a five-time club champion at Lakeside Golf Club in Hollywood, and once made a hole-in-one on the 16th at Cypress Point.

Crosby was a keen fisherman especially in his younger days but it was a pastime that he enjoyed throughout his life. In the summer of 1966 he spent a week as the guest of Lord Egremont, staying in Cockermouth and fishing on the River Derwent. His trip was filmed for "The American Sportsman" on ABC, although all did not go well at first as the salmon were not running. He did make up for it at the end of the week by catching a number of sea trout.

Crosby was married twice. His first wife was actress/nightclub singer Dixie Lee, to whom he was married from 1930 until her death from ovarian cancer in 1952; they had four sons: Gary, twins Dennis and Phillip, and Lindsay. The 1947 Susan Hayward film, "", is indirectly based on Lee's life. Bing and Dixie along with their children lived at 10500 Camarillo Street in North Hollywood for over five years. After her death, Crosby had relationships with model/Goldwyn Girl Pat Sheehan (who married his son Dennis in 1958) and actresses Inger Stevens and Grace Kelly before marrying the actress Kathryn Grant, who converted to Catholicism, in 1957. They had three children: Harry Lillis III (who played Bill in "Friday the 13th"), Mary (best known for portraying Kristin Shepard, who shot J. R. Ewing on TV's "Dallas"), and Nathaniel (the 1981 U.S. Amateur champion in golf).

Crosby was a seventh cousin of both President Calvin Coolidge and his Vice President, Charles G. Dawes.

Crosby reportedly had an alcohol problem in his youth, and may have been dismissed from Paul Whiteman's orchestra because of it, but he later got a handle on his drinking. According to Giddins, Crosby told his son Gary to stay away from alcohol, adding, "It killed your mother."

After Crosby's death, his eldest son, Gary, wrote a highly critical memoir, "Going My Own Way", depicting his father as cruel, cold, remote, and both physically and psychologically abusive. 
Gary Crosby wrote:

We had to keep a close watch on our actions ... When one of us left a sneaker or pair of underpants lying around, he had to tie the offending object on a string and wear it around his neck until he went off to bed that night. Dad called it "the Crosby lavalier". At the time the humor of the name escaped me ...

"Satchel Ass" or "Bucket Butt" or "My Fat-assed Kid". That's how he introduced me to his cronies when he dragged me along to the studio or racetrack ... By the time I was ten or eleven he had stepped up his campaign by adding lickings to the regimen. Each Tuesday afternoon he weighed me in, and if the scale read more than it should have, he ordered me into his office and had me drop my trousers ... I dropped my pants, pulled down my undershorts and bent over. Then he went at it with the belt dotted with metal studs he kept reserved for the occasion. Quite dispassionately, without the least display of emotion or loss of self-control, he whacked away until he drew the first drop of blood, and then he stopped. It normally took between twelve and fifteen strokes. As they came down I counted them off one by one and hoped I would bleed early ...

When I saw "Going My Way" I was as moved as they were by the character he played. Father O'Malley handled that gang of young hooligans in his parish with such kindness and wisdom that I thought he was wonderful too. Instead of coming down hard on the kids and withdrawing his affection, he forgave them their misdeeds, took them to the ball game and picture show, taught them how to sing. By the last reel, the sheer persistence of his goodness had transformed even the worst of them into solid citizens. Then the lights came on and the movie was over. All the way back to the house I thought about the difference between the person up there on the screen and the one I knew at home.

Younger son Phillip vociferously disputed his brother Gary's claims about their father. Around the time Gary made his claim, Phillip stated to the press that "Gary is a whining ... crybaby, walking around with a 2-by-4 and just daring people to nudge it off." However, Phillip did not deny that Crosby believed in corporal punishment. In an interview with "People", Phillip stated that "we never got an extra whack or a cuff we didn't deserve." During a later interview conducted in 1999 by the "Globe", Phillip said:

My dad was not the monster my lying brother said he was; he was strict, but my father never beat us black and blue, and my brother Gary was a vicious, no-good liar for saying so. I have nothing but fond memories of Dad, going to studios with him, family vacations at our cabin in Idaho, boating and fishing with him. To my dying day, I'll hate Gary for dragging Dad's name through the mud. He wrote "Going My Own Way" out of greed. He wanted to make money and knew that humiliating our father and blackening his name was the only way he could do it. He knew it would generate a lot of publicity. That was the only way he could get his ugly, no-talent face on television and in the newspapers. My dad was my hero. I loved him very much. He loved all of us too, including Gary. He was a great father.

However, Dennis and Lindsay Crosby confirmed that their father was physically abusive. Lindsay added, "I'm glad [Gary] did it. I hope it clears up a lot of the old lies and rumors." Unlike Gary, however, Lindsay said that he preferred to remember "all the good things I did with my dad and forget the times that were rough." Dennis asserted that the book was "Gary's business" and a result of his "anger," but would not deny the book's claims. Bing's younger brother, singer and jazz bandleader Bob Crosby, recalled at the time of Gary's revelations that Bing was a "disciplinarian," as their mother and father had been. He added, "We were brought up that way." In an interview for the same article, Gary clarified that Bing was abusive as a means of administering punishment: "He was not out to be vicious, to beat children for his kicks."

It was revealed that Crosby's will had established a blind trust, with none of the sons receiving an inheritance until they reached the age of 65.

Lindsay Crosby died in 1989 and Dennis Crosby died in 1991, both by suicide from self-inflicted gunshot wounds, at ages 51 and 56, respectively. Gary Crosby died in 1995 at the age of 62 of lung cancer and 69-year-old Phillip Crosby died in 2004 of a heart attack.

Widow Kathryn Crosby dabbled in local theater productions intermittently, and appeared in television tributes to her late husband.

Nathaniel Crosby, Crosby's youngest son from his second marriage, was a high-level golfer who won the U.S. Amateur at age 19 in 1981, at the time the youngest-ever winner of that event. Harry Crosby is an investment banker who occasionally makes singing appearances.

Denise Crosby, Dennis Crosby's daughter, is also an actress and is known for her role as Tasha Yar on "", and for the recurring role of the Romulan Sela (daughter of Tasha Yar) after her withdrawal from the series as a regular cast member. She also appeared in the film adaptation of Stephen King's novel "Pet Sematary". In 2006, Crosby's niece, Carolyn Schneider, published the laudatory book "Me and Uncle Bing".

There have been disputes between Crosby's two families beginning in the late 1990s. When Dixie died in 1952, her will provided that her share of the community property be distributed in trust to her sons. After Crosby's death in 1977, he left the residue of his estate to a marital trust for the benefit of his widow, Kathryn, and HLC Properties, Ltd., was formed for the purpose of managing his interests, including his right of publicity. In 1996, Dixie's trust sued HLC and Kathryn for declaratory relief as to the trust's entitlement to interest, dividends, royalties, and other income derived from the community property of Crosby and Dixie. In 1999, the parties settled for approximately $1.5 million. Relying on a retroactive amendment to the California Civil Code, Dixie's trust brought suit again, in 2010, alleging that Crosby's right of publicity was community property, and that Dixie's trust was entitled to a share of the revenue it produced. The trial court granted Dixie's trust's claim. The California Court of Appeal reversed, however, holding that the 1999 settlement barred the claim. In light of the court's ruling, it was unnecessary for the court to decide whether a right of publicity can be characterized as community property under California law.

Following his recovery from a life-threatening fungal infection of his right lung in January 1974, Crosby emerged from semi-retirement to start a new spate of albums and concerts. In March 1977, after videotaping a concert at the Ambassador Theater in Pasadena for CBS to commemorate his 50th anniversary in show business, and with Bob Hope looking on, Crosby fell off the stage into an orchestra pit, rupturing a disc in his back requiring a month in the hospital. His first performance after the accident was his last American concert, on August 16, 1977 (the day singer Elvis Presley died); when the power went out during his performance, he continued singing without amplification.

In September, Crosby, his family and singer Rosemary Clooney began a concert tour of Britain that included two weeks at the London Palladium. While in the UK, Crosby recorded his final album, "Seasons", and his final TV Christmas special with guest David Bowie on September 11 (which aired a little over a month after Crosby's death). His last concert was in the Brighton Centre on October 10, four days before his death, with British entertainer Dame Gracie Fields in attendance. The following day he made his final appearance in a recording studio and sang eight songs at the BBC Maida Vale studios for a radio program, which also included an interview with Alan Dell. Accompanied by the Gordon Rose Orchestra, Crosby's last recorded performance was of the song "Once in a While". Later that afternoon, he met with Chris Harding to take photographs for the "Seasons" album jacket.
On October 13, 1977, Crosby flew alone to Spain to play golf and hunt partridge. On October 14, 1977, at the La Moraleja Golf Course near Madrid, Crosby played 18 holes of golf. His partner was World Cup champion Manuel Piñero; their opponents were club president César de Zulueta and Valentín Barrios. According to Barrios, Crosby was in good spirits throughout the day, and was photographed several times during the round. At the ninth hole, construction workers building a house nearby recognized him, and when asked for a song, Crosby sang "Strangers in the Night". Crosby, who had a 13 handicap, lost to his partner by one stroke. As Crosby and his party headed back to the clubhouse, Crosby said, "That was a great game of golf, fellas." At about 6:30 pm, Crosby collapsed about 20 yards from the clubhouse entrance and died instantly from a massive heart attack. At the clubhouse and later in the ambulance, house physician Dr. Laiseca tried to revive him, but was unsuccessful. At Reina Victoria Hospital he was administered the last rites of the Catholic Church and was pronounced dead. On October 18, following a private funeral Mass at St. Paul's Catholic Church in Westwood, Crosby was buried at Holy Cross Cemetery in Culver City, California. A plaque was placed at the golf course in his memory.

He is a member of the National Association of Broadcasters Hall of Fame in the radio division.

The family launched an official website on October 14, 2007, the 30th anniversary of Crosby's death.

In his autobiography "Don't Shoot, It's Only Me!" (1990), Bob Hope wrote, "Dear old Bing. As we called him, the "Economy-sized Sinatra". And what a voice. God I miss that voice. I can't even turn on the radio around Christmas time without crying anymore."

Calypso musician Roaring Lion wrote a tribute song in 1939 titled "Bing Crosby", in which he wrote: "Bing has a way of singing with his very heart and soul / Which captivates the world / His millions of listeners never fail to rejoice / At his golden voice ..."

Bing Crosby Stadium in Front Royal, Virginia was named after Crosby in honor of his fundraising efforts and direct cash contributions for its construction in the 1948 to 1950 timeframe.

Crosby wrote or co-wrote lyrics to 22 songs. His composition "At Your Command" was no. 1 for three weeks on the U.S. pop singles chart beginning on August 8, 1931. "I Don't Stand a Ghost of a Chance With You" was his most successful composition, recorded by Duke Ellington, Frank Sinatra, Thelonious Monk, Billie Holiday, and Mildred Bailey, among others. Songs co-written by Crosby include:


Four performances by Bing Crosby have been inducted into the Grammy Hall of Fame, which is a special Grammy award established in 1973 to honor recordings that are at least 25 years old and that have "qualitative or historical significance".


Fisher, J. (2012). Bing crosby: Through the years, volumes one-nine (1954–56). ARSC Journal, 43(1), 127–130. 




</doc>
<doc id="46052" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46052" title="Sidney Poitier">
Sidney Poitier

Sir Sidney Poitier, (; born February 20, 1927) is a Bahamian American actor, film director, author, and diplomat.

In 1964, Poitier became the first Bahamian and first black actor to win an Academy Award for Best Actor, and the Golden Globe Award for Best Actor for his role in "Lilies of the Field". The significance of these achievements was bolstered in 1967, when he starred in three successful films, all of which dealt with issues involving race and race relations: "To Sir, with Love"; "In the Heat of the Night"; and "Guess Who's Coming to Dinner", making him the top box-office star of that year. In 1999, the American Film Institute named Poitier among the Greatest Male Stars of classic Hollywood cinema, ranking 22nd on the list of 25.

Poitier has directed a number of films, including "A Piece of the Action", "Uptown Saturday Night", "Let's Do It Again," with Bill Cosby; "Stir Crazy," starring Richard Pryor and Gene Wilder; and "Ghost Dad," also with Cosby. In 2002, thirty-eight years after receiving the Best Actor Award, Poitier was chosen by the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences to receive an Academy Honorary Award, in recognition of his "remarkable accomplishments as an artist and as a human being".

Poitier was knighted by Queen Elizabeth II in 1974. From 1997 to 2007, he served as the non-resident Bahamian ambassador to Japan. On August 12, 2009, Poitier was awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom, the United States' highest civilian honor, by President Barack Obama. In 2016, he was awarded the BAFTA Fellowship for outstanding lifetime achievement in film.

Sidney Poitier's parents were Evelyn (née Outten) and Reginald James Poitier, Bahamian farmers who owned a farm on Cat Island and traveled to Miami to sell tomatoes and other produce. Reginald worked as a cab driver in Nassau, Bahamas. Poitier was the youngest of eight sons, and was born in Miami while his parents were visiting. His birth was two months premature and he was not expected to survive, but his parents remained in Miami for three months to nurse him to health. Poitier grew up in the Bahamas, then a British Crown colony. Because of his birth in the United States, he automatically received American citizenship. Poitier's uncle has claimed that the "Poitier" ancestors on his father's side had migrated from Haiti and were probably part of the runaway slaves who had established maroon communities throughout the Bahamas, including Cat Island. He mentions that the surname "Poitier" is a French name, and there were no white Poitiers from the Bahamas. 

The name Poitier actually came from a planter of English heritage who immigrated to Cat Island from Jamaica in the early 1800s. His name was Charles Leonard Poitier, in 1834 his wife's estate on Cat Island had 86 slaves, 39 males and 47 females. The slaves kept the name Poitier, a name that was introduced into England during the Norman conquest in the 11th century. That is where the Poitier name actually came from not from Haiti.

Poitier lived with his family on Cat Island until he was 10, when they moved to Nassau, where he saw his first automobile, first experienced electricity, plumbing, refrigeration, and motion pictures. He was raised a Roman Catholic but, later became an agnostic with views closer to deism.

At the age of 15, he was sent to Miami to live with his brother's large family. At the age of 16, he moved to New York City and held a string of jobs as a dishwasher. A waiter sat with him every night for several weeks helping him learn to read the newspaper. He lied about his age and enlisted in the Army during World War II in 1943. He only served briefly as a mental hospital attendant and feigned insanity to get discharged, after which he worked as a dishwasher until a successful audition landed him a spot with the American Negro Theater.

Poitier joined the North American Negro Theater, but was rejected by audiences. Contrary to what was expected of black actors at the time, Poitier's tone deafness made him unable to sing. Determined to refine his acting skills and rid himself of his noticeable Bahamian accent, he spent the next six months dedicating himself to achieving theatrical success. On his second attempt at the theater, he was noticed and given a leading role in the Broadway production "Lysistrata", for which, though it ran a failing four days, he received an invitation to understudy for "Anna Lucas ta". By the end of 1949, he had to choose between leading roles on stage and an offer to work for Darryl F. Zanuck in the film "No Way Out" (1950). His performance in "No Way Out", as a doctor treating a Caucasian bigot (played by Richard Tidemark), was noticed and led to more roles, each considerably more interesting and more prominent than those most African American actors of the time were offered. Poitier's breakout role was as a member of an incorrigible high school class in "Blackboard Jungle" (1955).

Poitier was the first male actor of Bahamian descent to be nominated for a competitive Academy Award (for "The Defiant Ones", 1958). He was also the first actor of Bahamian descent to win the Academy Award for Best Actor (for "Lilies of the Field" in 1963). (James Basket was the first African American male to receive an Oscar, an Honorary Academy Award for his performance as Uncle Remus in the Walt Disney production of "Song of the South" in 1948, while Hattie McDaniel predated them both, winning as Best Supporting Actress for her role in 1939's "Gone with the Wind", making her the first person of African descent to be nominated for and receive an Oscar). His satisfaction at this honor was undermined by his concerns that this award was more of the industry congratulating itself for having him as a token and it would inhibit him from asking for more substantive considerations afterward. Poitier worked relatively little over the following year; he remained the only major actor of African descent and the roles offered were predominantly typecast as a soft-spoken appeaser.
He acted in the first production of "A Raisin in the Sun" on Broadway in 1959, and later starred in the film version released in 1961. He also gave memorable performances in "The Bedford Incident" (1965), and "A Patch of Blue" (1965) co-starring Elizabeth Hartman and Shelley Winters. In 1967, he was the most successful draw at the box office, the commercial peak of his career, with three popular films, "Guess Who's Coming to Dinner"; "To Sir, with Love" and "In the Heat of the Night". The last film featured his most successful character, Virgil Tibbs, a Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, detective whose subsequent career was the subject of two sequels: "They Call Me Mister Tibbs!" (1970) and "The Organization" (1971).

Poitier began to be criticized for being typecast as over-idealized African American characters who were not permitted to have any sexuality or personality faults, such as his character in "Guess Who's Coming To Dinner". Poitier was aware of this pattern himself, but was conflicted on the matter. He wanted more varied roles; but he also felt obliged to set an example with his characters, by challenging old stereotypes as he was the only major actor of African descent being cast in leading roles in the American film industry, at that time. For instance, in 1966, he turned down an opportunity to play the lead in an NBC television production of "Othello" with that spirit in mind.

In 2002, Poitier received the 2001 Honorary Academy Award for his overall contribution to American cinema. With the death of Ernest Borgnine, in 2012, he became the oldest living man to have won the Academy Award for Best Actor. On March 2, 2014, Poitier appeared with Angelina Jolie at the 86th Academy Awards, to present the Best Director Award. He was given a standing ovation. Jolie thanked him for all his Hollywood contributions, stating "we are in your debt". Poitier gave a brief acceptance speech, telling his peers to "keep up the wonderful work" to warm applause.

Poitier directed several films, the most successful being the Richard Pryor-Gene Wilder comedy "Stir Crazy", which for many years was the highest-grossing film directed by a person of African descent. His feature film directorial debut was the Western, "Buck and the Preacher," in which Poitier also starred, alongside Harry Belafonte. Poitier replaced the original director, Joseph Sargent. The trio of Poitier, Cosby, and Belafonte reunited, with Poitier again directing, in "Uptown Saturday Night". He directed Cosby in "Let's Do It Again", "A Piece of the Action", and "Ghost Dad". Poitier directed the first popular dance battle movie, "Fast Forward" in 1985.

Poitier recorded an album with the composer Fred Katz called "Poitier Meets Plato", in which Poitier recites passages from Plato's writings.

From 1995 to 2003, Poitier served as a member of the board of directors of The Walt Disney Company.

In April 1997, Poitier was appointed ambassador of the Bahamas to Japan, a position he held until 2007. From 2002 to 2007, he was concurrently the ambassador of the Bahamas to UNESCO.

Poitier was first married to Juanita Hardy from April 29, 1950, until 1965. In 1959, Poitier began a nine-year affair with actress Diahann Carroll. He has been married to Joanna Shimkus, a Canadian former actress of Lithuanian-Jewish and Irish descent, since January 23, 1976. He has four daughters with his first wife and two with his second: Beverly, Pamela, Sherri, Gina, Anika, and Sydney Tamiia.

In addition to his six daughters, Poitier has eight grandchildren and three great-grandchildren.


Poitier has written three autobiographical books:

Poitier is also the subject of the biography "Sidney Poitier: Man, Actor, Icon" (2004) by historian Aram Goudsouzian.

Poitier wrote the novel "Montaro Caine", released in May 2013.



Informational notes
Citations


</doc>
<doc id="49706" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49706" title="Paul Newman">
Paul Newman

Paul Leonard Newman (January 26, 1925 – September 26, 2008) was an American actor, voice actor, film director, producer, race car driver, IndyCar owner, entrepreneur, philanthropist, and activist. He won and was nominated for numerous awards, winning an Academy Award for his performance in the 1986 film "The Color of Money", a BAFTA Award, a Screen Actors Guild Award, a Cannes Film Festival Award, an Emmy Award, and many others. Newman's other roles include the title characters in "The Hustler" (1961), "Hud" (1963), "Harper" (1966) and "Cool Hand Luke" (1967), as well as "Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid" (1969), "The Life and Times of Judge Roy Bean" (1972), "The Sting" (1973), and "The Verdict" (1982). He also voiced Doc Hudson in the first installment of Disney-Pixar's "Cars"-as his final acting performance, and received a posthumous credit for his voice recordings in "Cars 3" (2017).

Newman won several national championships as a driver in Sports Car Club of America road racing, and his race teams won several championships in open-wheel IndyCar racing. He was a co-founder of Newman's Own, a food company from which he donated all post-tax profits and royalties to charity. As of January 2017, these donations have totaled over US$485 million. He was a co-founder of Safe Water Network, a nonprofit that develops sustainable drinking water solutions for those in need.

In 1988, Newman founded the SeriousFun Children's Network, a global family of summer camps and programs for children with serious illness which has served 290,076 children since its inception.

Newman was born in Shaker Heights, Ohio, the second son of Theresa Garth ("née" Fetzer, Fetzko, or Fetsko; ; died 1982) and Arthur Sigmund Newman (died 1950), who ran a sporting goods store.

Paul's father was Jewish, the son of Simon Newman and Hannah Cohn, emigrants from Hungary and Poland. His mother, Theresa, whose year of birth remains unclear but appears to have been between 1889 and 1895, was a practitioner of Christian Science. She was born to a Slovak Roman Catholic family in Peticse (near Homonna) in the Austro-Hungarian Empire (present-day Ptičie near Humenné, Slovakia). Newman had no religion as an adult, but described himself as a Jew, saying "it's more of a challenge". Newman's mother worked in his father's store, while raising Paul and his elder brother, Arthur, who later became a producer and production manager.

Newman showed an early interest in the theater; his first role was at the age of seven, playing the court jester in a school production of "Robin Hood". At age 10, Newman performed at the Cleveland Play House in a production of "Saint George and the Dragon", and was a notable actor and alumnus of their Curtain Pullers children's theatre program. Graduating from Shaker Heights High School in 1943, he briefly attended Ohio University in Athens, Ohio, where he was initiated into the Phi Kappa Tau fraternity.

Newman served in the United States Navy in World War II in the Pacific theater. Initially, he enrolled in the Navy V-12 pilot training program at Yale University, but was dropped when his colorblindness was discovered.

Boot camp followed, with training as a radioman and rear gunner. Qualifying in torpedo bombers in 1944, Aviation Radioman Third Class Newman was sent to Barbers Point, Hawaii. He was subsequently assigned to Pacific-based replacement torpedo squadrons VT-98, VT-99, and VT-100, responsible primarily for training replacement combat pilots and air crewmen, with special emphasis on carrier landings. He later flew as a turret gunner in an Avenger torpedo bomber. As a radioman-gunner, his unit was assigned to the along with other replacements shortly before the Battle of Okinawa in the spring of 1945. The pilot of his aircraft had an ear infection which kept their plane grounded. The rest of their squadron flew to the "Bunker Hill". Days later, a kamikaze attack on the vessel killed a number of service members, including the other members of his unit.

After the war, Newman completed his Bachelor of Arts in drama and economics at Kenyon College in Gambier, Ohio in 1949. Shortly after earning his degree, he joined several summer stock companies, most notably the Belfry Players in Wisconsin and the Woodstock Players in Illinois. He toured with them for three months and developed his talents as a part of Woodstock Players. He later attended the Yale School of Drama for one year, before moving to New York City to study under Lee Strasberg at the Actors Studio. Oscar Levant wrote that Newman initially was hesitant to leave New York for Hollywood, and that Newman had said, "Too close to the cake. Also, no place to study."

Newman arrived in New York City in 1951 with his first wife, Jackie Witte, taking up residence in the St. George section of Staten Island.

He made his Broadway theatre debut in the original production of William Inge's "Picnic" with Kim Stanley in 1953 and appeared in the original Broadway production of "The Desperate Hours" in 1955. In 1959, he was in the original Broadway production of "Sweet Bird of Youth" with Geraldine Page and three years later starred with Page in the film version. During this time Newman started acting in television. His first credited role was in a 1952 episode of "Tales of Tomorrow" entitled "Ice from Space". In the mid-1950s, he appeared twice on CBS's "Appointment with Adventure" anthology series.

In February 1954, Newman appeared in a screen test with James Dean, directed by Gjon Mili, for "East of Eden" (1955). Newman was tested for the role of Aron Trask, Dean for the role of Aron's fraternal twin brother Cal. Dean won his part, but Newman lost out to Richard Davalos. That same year, he co-starred with Eva Marie Saint and Frank Sinatra in a live—and color—television broadcast of "Our Town", a musical adaptation of Thornton Wilder's stage play. Newman was a last-minute replacement for James Dean. The Dean connection had resonance two other times, as Newman was cast in two leading roles originally earmarked for Dean, as Billy the Kid in "The Left Handed Gun" and as Rocky Graziano in "Somebody Up There Likes Me", both filmed after Dean's death in an automobile collision.

Newman's first film for Hollywood was "The Silver Chalice" (1954). The film was a box office failure and the actor would later acknowledge his disdain for it. In 1956, Newman garnered much attention and acclaim for the role of Rocky Graziano in "Somebody Up There Likes Me". In 1958, he starred in "Cat on a Hot Tin Roof" (1958), opposite Elizabeth Taylor. The film was a box office smash and Newman garnered his first Academy Award nomination. Also in 1958, Newman starred in "The Long, Hot Summer" with Joanne Woodward, with whom he reconnected on the set in 1957 (they had first met in 1953). He won Best Actor at the 1958 Cannes Film Festival for this film.

Newman starred in "The Young Philadelphians" (1959), "Exodus" (1960), "From the Terrace", (1960), "The Hustler" (1961), "Hud" (1963), Torn Curtain (1966), "Harper" (1966), "Hombre" (1967), "Cool Hand Luke" (1967), "The Towering Inferno" (1974), "Slap Shot" (1977), "Absence of Malice" (1981) and "The Verdict" (1982). He teamed with fellow actor Robert Redford and director George Roy Hill for "Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid" (1969) and "The Sting" (1973). After his marriage to Woodward they appeared together in "The Long, Hot Summer" (1958), "Rally 'Round the Flag, Boys!", (1958), "From the Terrace" (1960), "Paris Blues" (1961), "A New Kind of Love" (1963), "Winning" (1969), "WUSA" (1970), "The Drowning Pool" (1975), "Slap Shot" (1977) "Harry & Son" (1984), and "Mr. and Mrs. Bridge" (1990). They starred in the HBO miniseries "Empire Falls", but did not share any scenes.

In addition to starring in and directing "Harry & Son", Newman directed four feature films starring Woodward. They were "Rachel, Rachel" (1968), based on Margaret Laurence's "A Jest of God", the screen version of the Pulitzer Prize–winning play "The Effect of Gamma Rays on Man-in-the-Moon Marigolds" (1972), the television screen version of the Pulitzer Prize–winning play "The Shadow Box" (1980), and a screen version of Tennessee Williams' "The Glass Menagerie" (1987). Twenty-five years after "The Hustler", Newman reprised his role of "Fast Eddie" Felson in the Martin Scorsese–directed film "The Color of Money" (1986), for which he won the Academy Award for Best Actor.

In 2003, Newman appeared in a Broadway revival of Wilder's "Our Town", receiving his first Tony Award nomination for his performance. PBS and the cable network Showtime aired a taping of the production, and Newman was nominated for an Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Miniseries or TV Movie.

Newman's last movie appearance was as a conflicted mob boss in the 2002 film "Road to Perdition" opposite Tom Hanks, for which he was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor. His last appearance overall, although he continued to provide voice work for films, was in 2005 in the HBO mini-series "Empire Falls" (based on the Pulitzer Prize-winning novel by Richard Russo) in which he played the dissolute father of the protagonist, Miles Roby, and for which he won a Golden Globe and a Primetime Emmy. In 2006, in keeping with his strong interest in car racing, he provided the voice of Doc Hudson, a retired anthropomorphic race car, in Disney/Pixar's "Cars" — this was his final role for a major feature film. While not in the sequel "Cars 2" (2011), his voice was later used in the third film, "Cars 3" (2017), for which he received billing, almost nine years after his death.

Newman retired from acting in May 2007, saying "You start to lose your memory, you start to lose your confidence, you start to lose your invention. So I think that's pretty much a closed book for me." He came out of retirement to record narration for the 2007 documentary "Dale", about the life of NASCAR driver Dale Earnhardt, and for the 2008 documentary "The Meerkats".

With writer A. E. Hotchner, Newman founded Newman's Own, a line of food products, in 1982. The brand started with salad dressing and has expanded to include pasta sauce, lemonade, popcorn, salsa, and wine, among other things. Newman established a policy that all proceeds, after taxes, would be donated to charity. , the franchise has donated in excess of $400 million. He co-wrote a memoir about the subject with Hotchner, "Shameless Exploitation in Pursuit of the Common Good". Among other awards, Newman's Own co-sponsors the PEN/Newman's Own First Amendment Award, a $25,000 reward designed to recognize those who protect the First Amendment as it applies to the written word. 

One beneficiary of his philanthropy is the Hole in the Wall Gang Camp, a residential summer camp for seriously ill children located in Ashford, Connecticut, which Newman co-founded in 1988. It is named after the gang in his film "Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid" (1969), and the real-life, historic Hole-in-the-Wall outlaw hangout in the mountains of northern Wyoming. Newman's college fraternity, Phi Kappa Tau, adopted his Connecticut Hole in the Wall camp as their "national philanthropy" in 1995. The original camp has expanded to become several Hole in the Wall Camps in the U.S., Ireland, France, and Israel. The camps serve 13,000 children every year, free of charge.

In 1983, Newman became a Major Donor for The Mirror Theater Ltd, alongside Dustin Hoffman and Al Pacino, matching a grant from Laurence Rockefeller. Newman was inspired to invest by his connection with Lee Strasberg, as Lee’s then daughter-in-law Sabra Jones was the Founder and Producing Artistic Director of The Mirror. Paul Newman remained a friend of the company until his death and discussed at numerous times possible productions in which he could star with his wife, Joanne Woodward.

In June 1999, Newman donated $250,000 to Catholic Relief Services to aid refugees in Kosovo.

On June 1, 2007, Kenyon College announced that Newman had donated $10 million to the school to establish a scholarship fund as part of the college's current $230 million fund-raising campaign. Newman and Woodward were honorary co-chairs of a previous campaign.

Newman was one of the founders of the Committee Encouraging Corporate Philanthropy (CECP), a membership organization of CEOs and corporate chairpersons committed to raising the level and quality of global corporate philanthropy. Founded in 1999 by Newman and a few leading CEOs, CECP has grown to include more than 175 members and, through annual executive convenings, extensive benchmarking research, and best practice publications, leads the business community in developing sustainable and strategic community partnerships through philanthropy.
Newman was named the Most Generous Celebrity of 2008 by Givingback.org. He contributed $20,857,000 for the year of 2008 to the Newman's Own Foundation, which distributes funds to a variety of charities.

Upon Newman's death, the Italian newspaper (a "semi-official" paper of the Holy See) "L'Osservatore Romano" published a notice lauding Newman's philanthropy. It also commented that "Newman was a generous heart, an actor of a dignity and style rare in Hollywood quarters."

Newman was responsible for preserving lands around Westport, Connecticut. He lobbied the state's governor for funds for the 2011 Aspetuck Land Trust in Easton. In 2011 Paul Newman's estate gifted land to Westport to be managed by the Aspetuck Land Trust.

Newman was a lifelong Democrat. For his support of Eugene McCarthy in 1968 (and effective use of television commercials in California) and his opposition to the Vietnam War, Newman was placed nineteenth on Richard Nixon's enemies list, which Newman claimed was his greatest accomplishment. During the 1968 general election, Newman supported Democratic nominee Hubert Humphrey and appeared in a pre-election night telethon for him. Newman was also a vocal supporter of gay rights.

In January 1995, Newman was the chief investor of a group, including the writer E.L. Doctorow and the editor Victor Navasky, that bought the progressive-left wing periodical "The Nation". Newman was an occasional writer for the publication.

Consistent with his work for liberal causes, Newman publicly supported Ned Lamont's candidacy in the 2006 Connecticut Democratic Primary against Senator Joe Lieberman, and was even rumored as a candidate himself, until Lamont emerged as a credible alternative. He donated to Chris Dodd's presidential campaign. Newman earlier donated money to Bill Richardson's campaign for president in 2008.

Newman attended the March on Washington on August 28, 1963, and was also present at the first Earth Day event in Manhattan on April 22, 1970.

Newman was concerned about global warming and supported nuclear energy development as a solution.

Newman was an auto racing enthusiast, and first became interested in motorsports ("the first thing that I ever found I had any grace in") while training at the Watkins Glen Racing School for the filming of "Winning", a 1969 film. Because of his love and passion for racing, Newman agreed in 1971 to star in and to host his first television special, "Once Upon a Wheel," on the history of auto racing. It was produced and directed by David Winters, who co-owned a number of racing cars with Newman. Newman's first professional event as a racer was in 1972 at Thompson International Speedway, quietly entered as "P.L. Newman", by which he continued to be known in the racing community.

He was a frequent competitor in Sports Car Club of America (SCCA) events for the rest of the decade, eventually winning four national championships. He later drove in the 1979 24 Hours of Le Mans in Dick Barbour's Porsche 935 and finished in second place. Newman reunited with Barbour in 2000 to compete in the Petit Le Mans.
From the mid-1970s to the early 1990s, he drove for the Bob Sharp Racing team, racing mainly Datsuns (later rebranded as Nissans) in the Trans-Am Series. He became closely associated with the brand during the 1980s, even appearing in commercials for them in Japan and having a special edition of the Nissan Skyline named after him. At the age of 70 years and eight days, Newman became the oldest driver to date to be part of a winning team in a major sanctioned race, winning in his class at the 1995 24 Hours of Daytona. Among his last major races were the Baja 1000 in 2004 and the 24 Hours of Daytona once again in 2005.

During the 1976 auto racing season, Newman became interested in forming a professional auto racing team and contacted Bill Freeman who introduced Newman to professional auto racing management, and their company specialized in Can-Am, Indy Cars, and other high-performance racing automobiles. The team was based in Santa Barbara, California and commuted to Willow Springs International Motorsports Park for much of its testing sessions.

Their "Newman Freeman Racing" team was very competitive in the North American Can-Am series in their Budweiser sponsored Chevrolet-powered Spyder NFs. Newman and Freeman began a long and successful partnership with the Newman Freeman Racing team in the Can-Am series which culminated in the Can-Am Team Championship trophy in 1979. Newman was associated with Freeman's established Porsche racing team which allowed both Newman and Freeman to compete in S.C.C.A. and I.M.S.A. racing events together, including the Sebring 12-hour endurance sports car race. This car was sponsored by Beverly Porsche/Audi. Freeman was Sports Car Club of America's Southern Pacific National Champion during the Newman Freeman Racing period. Later Newman co-founded Newman/Haas Racing with Carl Haas, a Champ Car team, in 1983, going on to win 8 drivers' championships under his ownership. The 1996 racing season was chronicled in the IMAX film "Super Speedway", which Newman narrated. He was a partner in the Atlantic Championship team Newman Wachs Racing.

Having said he would quit "when I embarrass myself", Newman competed into his 80s, winning at Lime Rock in what former co-driver Sam Posey called a "brutish Corvette" displaying his age as its number: 81. He took the pole in his last professional race, in 2007 at Watkins Glen International, and in a 2008 run at Lime Rock, arranged by friends, he reportedly still did 9/10ths of his best time.

Newman was posthumously inducted into the SCCA Hall of Fame at the national convention in Las Vegas, Nevada on February 21, 2009.

Newman's racing life was chronicled In the documentary "".

Newman was married twice. His first marriage was to Jackie Witte from 1949 to 1958. They had a son, Scott (19501978), and two daughters, Stephanie Kendall (born 1951) and Susan (born 1953). Scott, who appeared in films including "Breakheart Pass", "The Towering Inferno", and the 1977 film "Fraternity Row", died in November 1978 from a drug overdose. Newman started the Scott Newman Center for drug abuse prevention in memory of his son. Susan is a documentary filmmaker and philanthropist, and has Broadway and screen credits, including a starring role as one of four Beatles fans in "I Wanna Hold Your Hand" (1978), and also a small role opposite her father in "Slap Shot". She also received an Emmy nomination as co-producer of his telefilm, "The Shadow Box".

Newman met actress Joanne Woodward in 1953. Shortly after filming The Long, Hot Summer in 1957, he divorced Witte. He married Woodward early in 1958. The Newmans moved away from Hollywood in the early 1960s, buying a home and starting a family in Westport, Connecticut. They were one of the very first Hollywood movie star couples to choose to raise their families outside California. They remained married for 50 years, until his death in 2008. They had three daughters: Elinor "Nell" Teresa (b. 1959), Melissa "Lissy" Stewart (b. 1961), and Claire "Clea" Olivia (b. 1965). Newman was well known for his devotion to his wife and family. When once asked about his reputation for fidelity, he famously quipped, "Why go out for a hamburger when you have steak at home?" He also said that he never met anyone who had as much to lose as he did. In his profile on "60 Minutes" he admitted he once left Woodward after a fight, walked around the outside of the house, knocked on the front door and explained to Joanne he had nowhere to go. Newman directed Nell alongside her mother in the films "Rachel, Rachel" and "The Effect of Gamma Rays on Man-in-the-Moon Marigolds".

Newman was an ordained minister of the Universal Life Church.

Newman was scheduled to make his professional stage directing debut with the Westport Country Playhouse's 2008 production of John Steinbeck's "Of Mice and Men", but he stepped down on May 23, 2008, citing his health concerns.

In June 2008, it was widely reported in the press that he had been diagnosed with lung cancer and was receiving treatment for the condition at the Sloan-Kettering hospital in New York City. A.E. Hotchner, who partnered in the 1980s with Newman to start "Newman's Own", told the Associated Press in an interview in mid-2008 that Newman had told him about being afflicted with the disease about 18 months prior. Newman's spokesman told the press that the star was "doing nicely", but neither confirmed nor denied that he had cancer.

Newman died on the morning of September 26, 2008, in the presence of his family. His body was cremated after a private funeral service near his home in Westport.


Newman is one of four actors to have been nominated for an Academy Award in five different decades. The other nominees were Laurence Olivier, Michael Caine, and Jack Nicholson.

In addition to the awards Newman won for specific roles, he received an honorary Academy Award in 1986 for his "many and memorable and compelling screen performances" and the Jean Hersholt Humanitarian Award for his charity work in 1994.

He received the Kennedy Center Honors in 1992 along with his wife, Joanne Woodward.

In 1994, Newman and his wife received the Award for Greatest Public Service Benefiting the Disadvantaged, an award given out annually by Jefferson Awards.

Newman won Best Actor at the Cannes Film Festival for "The Long, Hot Summer" and the Silver Bear at the Berlin International Film Festival for "Nobody's Fool".

In 1968, Newman was named "Man of the Year" by Harvard University's performance group, the Hasty Pudding Theatricals.

The 2008 Edition of "Sport Movies & TV - Milano International FICTS Fest" was dedicated to his memory.

In 2015, the U.S. Postal Service issued a 'forever stamp' honoring Newman, which went on sale September 18, 2015. It features a 1980 photograph of Newman by photographer Steve Schapiro, accompanied by text that reads: 'Actor/Philanthropist'.

Since the 1970s, an event called "Newman Day" has been celebrated at Kenyon College, Bates College, Princeton University, and other American colleges. On "Newman Day", students try to drink 24 beers in 24 hours, based on a quote attributed to Newman about there being 24 beers in a case, and 24 hours in a day, and that this is surely not a mere coincidence. In 2004, Newman requested that Princeton University disassociate the event from his name, due to the fact that he did not endorse the behavior, citing his creation in 1980 of the Scott Newman Centre, "dedicated to the prevention of substance abuse through education". Princeton disavowed any responsibility for the event, responding that Newman Day is not sponsored, endorsed, or encouraged by the university itself and is solely an unofficial event among students.

On October 26, 2017, Paul Newman's Rolex Daytona was auctioned in New York by Phillips Auctioneers for $17.75 million, making it the most expensive wristwatch ever sold. 






</doc>
<doc id="190388" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=190388" title="Anna Magnani">
Anna Magnani

Anna Magnani (; 7 March 1908 – 26 September 1973) was an Italian stage and film actress. She won the Academy Award for Best Actress, along with four other international awards, for her portrayal of a Sicilian widow in "The Rose Tattoo".

Born in Rome, she worked her way through Rome's Academy of Dramatic Art by singing at night clubs. During her career, her only child was stricken by polio when he was 18 months old and remained crippled.

She was referred to as "La Lupa," the "perennial toast of Rome" and a "living she-wolf symbol" of the cinema. "Time" magazine described her personality as "fiery", and drama critic Harold Clurman said her acting was "volcanic". In the realm of Italian cinema she was "passionate, fearless, and exciting," an actress that film historian Barry Monush calls "the volcanic earth mother of all Italian cinema." Director Roberto Rossellini called her "the greatest acting genius since Eleonora Duse". Playwright Tennessee Williams became an admirer of her acting and wrote "The Rose Tattoo" specifically for her to star in, a role for which she received an Oscar in 1955.

After meeting director Goffredo Alessandrini she received her first screen role in "La cieca di Sorrento" ("The Blind Woman of Sorrento") (1934) and later achieved international fame in Rossellini's "Rome, Open City" (1945), considered the first significant movie to launch the Italian neorealism movement in cinema. As an actress she became recognized for her dynamic and forceful portrayals of "earthy lower-class women" in such films as "L'Amore" (1948), "Bellissima" (1951), "The Rose Tattoo" (1955), "The Fugitive Kind" (1960) and "Mamma Roma" (1962). As early as 1950 "Life" magazine had already stated that Magnani was "one of the most impressive actresses since Garbo".

Magnani's parentage and birthplace are uncertain. Some sources suggest she was born in Rome, others in Egypt. Her mother was Marina Magnani. The film director, Franco Zeffirelli, who claimed to know Magnani well, states in his autobiography that she was born in Alexandria, Egypt, to an Italian-Jewish mother and Egyptian father, and that "only later did she become Roman when her grandmother brought her over and raised her in one of the Roman slum districts." Magnani herself stated that her mother was married in Egypt but returned to Rome before giving birth to her at Porta Pia, and did not know how the rumour of her Egyptian birth got started. She was enrolled in a French convent school in Rome where she learned to speak French and play the piano. She also developed a passion for acting from watching the nuns stage their Christmas plays. This period of formal education lasted until the age of fourteen.

She was a "plain, frail child with a forlornness of spirit". Her grandparents compensated by pampering her with food and clothes. Yet while growing up, she is said to have felt more at ease around "more earthly" companions, often befriending the "toughest kid on the block". This trait carried over into her adult life when she proclaimed, "I hate respectability. Give me the life of the streets, of common people."

At age 17, she went on to study at the Eleonora Duse Royal Academy of Dramatic Art in Rome for two years. To support herself, Magnani sang in nightclubs and cabarets; leading to her being dubbed "the Italian Édith Piaf". However, an actor friend Micky Knox, writes that she "never studied acting formally" and started her career in Italian music halls singing traditional Roman Folk songs. "She was instinctive" he writes. "She had the ability to call up emotions at will, to move an audience, to convince them that life on the stage was as real and natural as life in their own kitchen."

She was considered an "outstanding theatre actress" in "Anna Christie" and "The Petrified Forest" and had a successful career in variety shows.

In 1933 she was acting in experimental plays in Rome when she was discovered by Italian filmmaker Goffredo Alessandrini. He had been one of the first Italian filmmakers to make use of sound. The two married the same year, and he subsequently directed her in her first major film role in "The Blind Woman of Sorrento" ("La Cieca di Sorrento") in 1934. In 1941, Magnani starred in "Teresa Venerdì" ("Friday Theresa") with the writer and director Vittorio De Sica. He called this Magnani's "first true film". In it she plays Loletta Prima, the girlfriend of De Sica’s character, Pietro Vignali. De Sica described Magnani's laugh as "loud, overwhelming, and tragic". 

During her career Magnani worked alongside a number of the most pre-eminent directors and screenwriters; including Roberto Rossellini, Pier Paolo Pasolini, Luchino Visconti, Federico Fellini, Jean Renoir, Sidney Lumet, and Tennessee Williams.

Her film career had spread over almost 20 years before she gained international renown as Pina in Roberto Rossellini's neorealist milestone "Roma, città aperta" ("Rome, Open City", 1945). Her harrowing death scene remains one of cinema's most devastating moments. The film was about Italy's final days under German occupation during World War II where Magnani gave a "brilliant performance" as a woman who dies fighting to protect her husband, an underground fighter against the Nazis.

In Italy (and gradually elsewhere) she soon became established as a star, although she lacked the conventional beauty and glamour often associated with the term. Slightly plump and rather short in stature with a face framed by unkempt raven hair and eyes encircled by deep, dark shadows, she smouldered with seething earthiness and volcanic temperament. Rossellini, whom she called "this forceful, secure courageous man", was her lover at the time, and she collaborated with him on other films. 

Other collaborations with Rossellini include "L'Amore", a two part film from 1948 which includes "The Miracle" and "The Human Voice" ("Il miracolo", and "Una voce umana"). In the former, Magnani, playing a peasant outcast who believes the baby she's carrying is Christ, plumbs both the sorrow and the righteousness of being alone in the world. The latter film, based on Jean Cocteau's play about a woman desperately trying to salvage a relationship over the telephone, is remarkable for the ways in which Magnani's powerful moments of silence segue into cries of despair. 

After "The Miracle", Rossellini promised to direct Magnani in a film he was preparing which he told her would be "the crowning vehicle of her career". However, when the screenplay was completed, he instead gave the role for "Stromboli" to the Swedish actress, Ingrid Bergman. The two subsequently began a love affair; and this resulted in Magnani's permanent breakup with Rossellini.

As a result, Magnani took on the starring role of "Volcano", which was said to have been deliberately produced to invite comparison: both films were shot in similar locales of Aeolian Islands only 40 kilometres apart; both actresses played independent-minded roles in a neorealist fashion; and both films were shot simultaneously. "Life" magazine wrote, "... in an atmosphere crackling with rivalry... Reporters were accredited, like war correspondents, to one or the other of the embattled camps... Partisanship infected the Via Veneto (boulevard in Rome), where Magnaniacs and Bergmaniacs clashed frequently." However, Magnani still considered Rossellini the "greatest director she ever acted for".

In Luchino Visconti's "Bellissima" (1951) she plays Maddalena, a blustery, obstinate stage mother who drags her daughter to Cinecittà for the 'Prettiest Girl in Rome' contest, with dreams that her plain daughter will be a star. Her emotions in the film went from those of rage and humiliation to maternal love. The film was made during the "grim period" of Italy's post-World War II recovery.

Magnani then went on to star as Camille (stage name: Columbine) in Jean Renoir's film "Le Carrosse d'or" (also known as "The Golden Coach") in 1953. Here she played a woman torn between three men - a soldier, a bullfighter, and a viceroy. Renoir called her "the greatest actress I have ever worked with". 

She played the widowed mother of a teenage daughter in Daniel Mann's 1955 film, "The Rose Tattoo", based on the play by Tennessee Williams. It co-starred Burt Lancaster, and was Magnani's first English speaking role in a mainstream Hollywood movie, winning her the Academy Award for Best Actress. Lancaster, who played the role of a "lusty truck driver", said that "if she had not found acting as an outlet for her enormous vitality, she would have become 'a great criminal'".

Film historian John DiLeo has written that Magnani's acting in the film "displays why she is inarguably one of the half dozen greatest screen actresses of all time", and added:"Whenever Magnani laughs or cries (which is often), it's as if you've never seen anyone laugh or cry before: has laughter ever been so burstingly joyful or tears so shatteringly sad?

Tennessee Williams wrote the screenplay and based the character of Serafina on Magnani, as Williams was a great admirer of her acting abilities, and he even stipulated that the movie "must star what "Time" described as 'the most explosive emotional actress of her generation, Anna Magnani." In his "Memoirs", Williams described why he insisted on Magnani playing this role:"Anna Magnani was magnificent as Serafina in the movie version of "Tattoo"... She was as unconventional a woman as I have known in or out of my professional world, and if you understand me at all, you must know that in this statement I am making my personal estimate of her honesty, which I feel was complete. She never exhibited any lack of self-assurance, any timidity in her relations with that society outside of whose conventions she quite publicly existed... [s]he looked absolutely straight into the eyes of whomever she confronted and during that golden time in which we were dear friends, I never heard a false word from her mouth."

It was originally staged on Broadway with Maureen Stapleton as Magnani's English was too limited at the time for her to star. Magnani won other Best Actress awards for her role, including the BAFTA Film Award, Golden Globes Award, National Board of Review, USA, and the New York Film Critics Circle Awards. 
When her name was announced as the Oscar winner, an American journalist called her in Rome to tell her the news; his challenge was convincing her he wasn't joking.

Magnani worked with Tennessee Williams again for the 1960 film, "The Fugitive Kind" (originally titled, "Orpheus Descending") directed by Sidney Lumet, in which she played Lady Torrance and starred with Marlon Brando. The original screenplay "Orpheus Descending" was another play inspired by Magnani, although she similarly did not feature in the Broadway play. In the film she played a woman "hardened by life's cruelties and a grief that will not fade." It also co-starred a young Joanne Woodward in one of her early roles. In an article he wrote for "Life" magazine Williams discussed why he chose her for the part:"Anna and I had both cherished the dream that her appearance in the part I created for her in "The Fugitive Kind" would be her greatest triumph to date... She is simply a rare being who seems to have about her a little lightning-shot cloud all her own... In a crowded room she can sit perfectly motionless and silent and still you feel the atmospheric tension of her presence, its quiver and hum in the air like a live wire exposed, and a mood of Anna's is like the presence of royalty."
"The Wild, Wild Women" (Nella Citta' L'Inferno, 1958) paired Magnani, as an unrepentant streetwalker, with Giulietta Masina in a women-in-prison film.

In Pier Paolo Pasolini's "Mamma Roma "(1962), Magnani is both the mother and the whore, playing an irrepressible prostitute determined to give her teenage son a respectable middle-class life. "Mamma Roma", while one of Magnani's critically acclaimed films, was not released in the United States until 1995, deemed too controversial thirty years earlier. By now she was frustrated at being typecast in the roles of poor women. Magnani in 1963 commented "I’m bored stiff with these everlasting parts as a hysterical, loud, working-class woman".

In one of her last film roles, "The Secret of Santa Vittoria" (1969), she co-starred with Anthony Quinn, and they played husband and wife in what "Life" magazine called "perhaps the most memorable fight since Jimmy Cagney smashed Mae Clarke in the face with a half a grapefruit." Magnani and Quinn did feud in private outside view of the cameras, however, and their animosity spilled over into their scenes:"By the time the movie makers were ready to shoot the fight scene, the stars were ready too. Magnani not only went for Quinn with the pasta and with a rolling pin, but with her foot; she kicked so hard she broke a bone in her right foot. She also bit him in the neck. 'That's not in the script', Quinn protested. Magnani snarled, 'I'm supposed to win this fight, remember?"

She later played herself (within a dramatic context) in Federico Fellini's "Roma" (1972). Towards the end of her career, Magnani was quoted as having said, "The day has gone when I deluded myself that making movies was art. Movies today are made up of…intellectuals who always make out that they’re teaching something". 

According to film critic Robin Wood Magnani's "persona as a great actress is built, not on transformation, but on emotional authenticity... [she] doesn't portray characters but expresses 'genuine' emotions." Her style is notable by not displaying the more obvious attributes of the female star, with neither her face or physical makeup being considered "beautiful". However, she possesses a "remarkably expressive face," and for American audiences, at least, she represents "what Hollywood had consistently failed to produce: 'reality'". She was the atypical star, the "nonglamorous human being", as her genuine style of acting became a "rejection of glamour".

Her most distinguished work in Hollywood is in "Wild is the Wind", according to Wood. Directed by George Cukor, "the American cinema's greatest director of actresses," he was able to draw out the "individual essence" of Magnani's "sensitive and inward performance." Her other well-known Hollywood films were "The Rose Tattoo", which she won the best actress Oscar for in 1955, and "The Fugitive Kind".

During Benito Mussolini's rule, Magnani was known to make rude jokes about the Italian Fascist Party.
She married her first film director, Goffredo Alessandrini, in 1935, two years after he discovered her on stage. After they married, she retired from full-time acting to "devote herself exclusively to her husband", although she continued to play smaller film parts. They separated in 1942.

Magnani had a love affair with the actor Massimo Serato, by whom she had her only child, a son named Luca, who was born on October 29, 1942 in Rome, after her separation from Alessandrini. Magnani's life was struck by tragedy when Luca came down with crippling polio at only 18 months of age. He never regained use of his legs. As a result, she spent most of her early earnings for specialists and hospitals. After once seeing a legless war veteran drag himself along the sidewalk, she said, "I realize now that it's worse when they grow up", and resolved to earn enough to "shield him forever from want".
In 1945 she fell in love with director Roberto Rossellini while working on "Roma, Città Aperta" aka "Rome, Open City" (1945). "I thought at last I had found the ideal man... [He] had lost a son of his own and I felt we understood each other. Above all, we had the same artistic conceptions." Rossellini had become violent, volatile and possessive, and they argued constantly about films or out of jealousy. "In fits of rage they threw crockery at each other." As artists, however, they complemented each other well while working on neorealist films. The two finally split apart when Rossellini fell in love with and married, Ingrid Bergman.

Magnani was mystically inclined and consulted astrologers, as well as believing in numerology. She also claimed to be clairvoyant. She ate and drank very little and could subsist for long periods on nothing more than black coffee and cigarettes. However, these habits often affected her sleep: "My nights are appalling," she said. "I wake up in a state of nerves and it takes me hours to get back in touch with reality." Perhaps her strangest quirk was her love of defleaing street kittens with her thumbnails.

Magnani died at the age of 65 in Rome from pancreatic cancer in 1973. Huge crowds gathered for the funeral. She was provisionally laid to rest in the family mausoleum of Roberto Rossellini; but then subsequently interred in the Cimitero Comunale of San Felice Circeo in southern Lazio.




</doc>
<doc id="206714" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=206714" title="Geraldine Page">
Geraldine Page

Geraldine Sue Page (November 22, 1924 – June 13, 1987) was an American film, television and stage actress. An eight-time Academy Award nominee, she was nominated for "Hondo" (1953), "Summer and Smoke" (1961), "Sweet Bird of Youth" (1962), "You're a Big Boy Now" (1966), "Pete 'n' Tillie" (1972), "Interiors" (1978) and "The Pope of Greenwich Village" (1984), before winning the Academy Award for Best Actress for her performance as Carrie Watts in "The Trip to Bountiful" (1985).

Page made her Broadway debut in 1953 and went on to receive Tony Award nominations for "Sweet Bird of Youth" (1959–60), "Absurd Person Singular" (1974–75), "Agnes of God" (1982) and "Blithe Spirit" (1987). She won Golden Globe Awards for "Summer and Smoke" (1961) and "Sweet Bird of Youth" (1962); Emmy Awards for "A Christmas Memory" (1966) and "The Thanksgiving Visitor" (1967), both written by Truman Capote, and the BAFTA Award for Best Actress in a Supporting Role for "Interiors". She was inducted into the American Theater Hall of Fame in 1983.

Page was born in Kirksville, Missouri. She was the daughter of Edna Pearl (née Maize) and Leon Elwin Page, who worked at Andrew Taylor Still College of Osteopathy and Surgery (combined with the American School of Osteopathy, eventually to form A.T. Still University). He was an author whose works included "Practical Anatomy" (1925), "Osteopathic Fundamentals" (1926), and "The Old Doctor" (1932). She had a younger brother, Frederick.

The Page's were all active members of the Englewood Methodist Church in Chicago, Illinois, where Geraldine got her first feel for acting within the churches theatre group playing Jo March in the churches 1941 production of Louisa May Alcott's "Little Women". After graduating from Chicago's Englewood Technical Prep Academy in Chicago, Illinois, she attended the Goodman School of Drama at the Art Institute of Chicago (later renamed The Theatre School at DePaul University) in Chicago and later studied acting with Uta Hagen in New York City.

Page was a trained method actor and worked closely with Lee Strasberg. She began appearing in stock theatre at age 17. Her appearance as Alma in the 1952 production of "Summer and Smoke", written by Tennessee Williams and staged at Circle in the Square Theatre in New York City's Greenwich Village, was legendary.

Her work continued on Broadway as the spinster in the 1954–1955 production of "The Rainmaker", written by N. Richard Nash; and as the frustrated wife whose husband becomes romantically obsessed with a young Arab, played by James Dean, in the 1954 production of "The Immoralist", written by Augustus Goetz and Ruth Goetz and based on the novel of the same name (1902) by André Gide.

She earned critical accolades for her performance in the 1959 production of Williams's "Sweet Bird of Youth" opposite Paul Newman. She originated the role of a larger-than-life, addicted, sexually voracious Hollywood legend trying to extinguish her fears about her career with a young hustler named Chance Wayne, played by Newman. For her performance, Page received her first nomination for the Tony Award for Best Actress in a Play, as well as the Sarah Siddons Award for her performance in Chicago. She and Newman later starred in the film adaptation of the same name (1962) and Page earned a nomination for the Academy Award for Best Actress for the film.

In 1964, she starred in a Broadway revival of Anton Chekhov's "Three Sisters" playing eldest sister Olga to Kim Stanley's Masha with Barbara Baxley as the interloper Natasha (Shelley Winters would later play this role in the film adaptation). Both Shirley Knight and Sandy Dennis played the youngest sister Irina at different stages in this production. It was directed by Lee Strasberg (and a version of it was preserved on film). In 1967, Page starred in Peter Shaffer's "Black Comedy/White Lies," a production which also included Michael Crawford and Lynn Redgrave, who were making their Broadway debuts.

Page received a nomination for the Tony Award for Best Featured Actress in a Play (her second Tony Award nomination) for the 1975 production of Alan Ayckbourn's "Absurd Person Singular" with Sandy Dennis and Richard Kiley.

Page also starred as Zelda Fitzgerald in the last major Broadway production of a Williams play, "Clothes for a Summer Hotel", which did not succeed financially on Broadway in 1980.

In 1973, she played Mary Todd Lincoln opposite Maya Angelou in the Broadway production of the two-character play "Look Away", written by Jerome Kilty.

Page starred as the secretive nun Mother Miriam Ruth in the Broadway production of "Agnes of God," which opened in 1982 and ran for 599 performances with Page performing in nearly all of them; for her role, she received a nomination for the Tony Award for Best Actress in a Play. In 1983, Page was inducted into the American Theater Hall of Fame.

Also in 1983, Geraldine Page invited the young actress Sabra Jones Strasberg to her dressing room to talk to Sabra about how much she had liked her performance in St. Joan by Maxwell Anderson, in which Geraldine had just seen her play the part originated by Ingrid Bergman. During this conversation Sabra asked her advice in forming a classic theatre based on alternating repertory. This became the Mirror Theater Ltd with its repertory program the Mirror Repertory, and Geraldine accepted the role of Founding Artist in Residence. Page went on in that capacity until she died, performing in "Inheritors" by Susan Glaspell, "Paradise Lost" by Clifford Odets, "Rain" by John Colton (based on the short story "Miss Thompson" by W. Somerset Maugham), "Vivat! Vivat Regina!" by Robert Bolt (in which she played Elizabeth I), "Clarence" by Booth Tarkington, and "The Madwoman of Chaillot" (in which she played the Madwoman to great acclaim). She also appeared in "The Circle" by W. Somerset Maugham. It was during this production that she received the Academy Award for Best Actress for "The Trip to Bountiful" and thanked The Mirror Theater Ltd on worldwide television. At the academy Awards, Geraldine wore her costume from The Circle as she had said it was the "most beautifully designed dress she had ever worn." The dress was designed and made by Gail Cooper-Hecht, the Mirror Theater in house costume designer. She received the award from F. Murray Abraham, who, after winning his Oscar for "Amadeus", also joined the Mirror Repertory Company to play the rag-picker in the "Madwoman of Chaillot".

After winning an Academy Award Geraldine returned to the run of The Circle for Mirror Theater. The next fall she asked permission to return to Broadway in a revival of Noël Coward's "Blithe Spirit" as "Madame Arcati". The production was Page's last. She was again nominated for the Tony Award for Best Actress in a Play. She did not win, and several days after the awards ceremony, she died. The show lasted several weeks more, with co-star actress Patricia Conolly taking over Page's role.

Geraldine's official film debut and role in "Hondo", opposite John Wayne, garnered her a nomination for the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress. "Actually "Hondo" wasn't my first movie. I had one small, but satisfactory scene in a Dan Dailey picture called "Taxi", which was filmed in New York" - Geraldine Page. In all, despite her relatively small filmography, Page received eight Academy Award nominations. She finally won the Oscar in 1986 for her performance in "The Trip to Bountiful", which was based on a play by Horton Foote.

When she won (F. Murray Abraham, upon opening the envelope, exclaimed, "I consider this woman the greatest actress in the English language"), she received a standing ovation from the audience. She was surprised by her win (she openly talked about being a seven-time Oscar loser), and took a while to get to the stage to accept the award because she had taken off her shoes while sitting in the audience. She had not expected to win, and her feet were sore.

Her other notable screen roles included Academy Award-nominated performances in Tennessee Williams' "Summer and Smoke", "Sweet Bird of Youth", "You're a Big Boy Now", "Pete 'n' Tillie", Woody Allen's "Interiors" and "The Pope of Greenwich Village".

In 1963, Page starred in "Toys in the Attic", based on Lillian Hellman's play of the same name, and garnered a Golden Globe nomination. She received another nomination the following year starring in Delbert Mann's "Dear Heart" as a self-sufficient but lonely postmistress visiting New York City for a convention, finding love with a greeting card salesman.

In 1969, Page appeared opposite Ruth Gordon in "What Ever Happened to Aunt Alice?", the third and final film in the Robert Aldrich-produced trilogy which followed "What Ever Happened to Baby Jane?" (1962) and "Hush… Hush, Sweet Charlotte" (1964). The film is based on the novel "The Forbidden Garden" from Ursula Curtiss and features Page as Claire Marrable, a recently widowed socialite, who, upon discovering that her husband has left her virtually nothing, hires a number of unsuspecting housekeepers whom she murders one by one and robs them of their life savings in order to keep up her extravagant lifestyle. However, her latest hire (Gordon) is determined to discover the whereabouts of one of the previous housekeepers.

She has also appeared in roles such as a repressed schoolmistress in the Clint Eastwood film "The Beguiled"; a charismatic evangelist (modeled after Aimee Semple McPherson) in "The Day of the Locust"; a nun, Sister Walburga, in "Nasty Habits"; and as "Aunt Beverly" in "Harry's War". Her final film was the 1987 Mary Stuart Masterson film "My Little Girl", which featured the film debut of Jennifer Lopez. She also was a voice actress and voiced the villainous Madame Medusa in the Disney animated film "The Rescuers".

She performed in various television shows in the 1950s through the 1980s, including movies and series, such as "Hawaii Five-O", "Kojak", and several episodes of Rod Serling's "Night Gallery", including "The Sins of the Fathers" and "Something in the Woodwork".

In 1959, Page was an Emmy nominee, of Best Single Performance by an Actress, for her role in the "Playhouse 90" episode "The Old Man". Page later received two Emmy Awards for her work in adaptations of Truman Capote stories. In 1967, she won an Emmy for Outstanding Single Performance by an Actress in a Leading Role in a Drama for her performance in "A Christmas Memory" on "ABC Stage 67". In 1969, she received an Emmy for Outstanding Single Performance by an Actress in a Leading Role for her performance in "The Thanksgiving Visitor".

Page was married to violinist Alexander Schneider from 1954 to 1957. On September 8, 1963, she married actor Rip Torn, who was six years her junior, in Pinal, Arizona. They remained married until her death. Page bore him three children, a daughter (actress Angelica Page) and twin sons, actor Tony Torn, and Northern Arizona University professor John Torn.

Page, who suffered from kidney disease, died of a heart attack in 1987 during a run on Broadway in Sir Noël Coward's "Blithe Spirit" at the Neil Simon Theatre. She did not arrive for either of the show's two June 13 performances; at the end of the evening performance, the play's producer announced that she had died at the age of 62. 
Five days after her death, "an overflow crowd of colleagues, friends and fans", including Sissy Spacek, James Earl Jones, Amanda Plummer, Jerry Stiller, Anne Meara, and husband Rip Torn filled the Neil Simon Theatre to pay tribute.

Her achievements as a stage actress and teacher were highlighted; actress Anne Jackson stated at the tribute that "[Page] used a stage like no one else I'd ever seen. It was like playing tennis with someone who had 26 arms." Rip Torn called her "Mi corazon, mi alma, mi esposa" ("My heart, my soul, my wife") and said they had "never stopped being lovers, and ... never will." Page was cremated.




</doc>
<doc id="163012" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=163012" title="Glenda Jackson">
Glenda Jackson

Glenda May Jackson, CBE (born 9 May 1936) is a British actress and former Labour Party politician.

As a professional actress from the late 1950s, she spent four years as a member of the Royal Shakespeare Company from 1964, being particularly associated with the work of director Peter Brook. During her film career, she won two Academy Awards for Best Actress: for "Women in Love" (1970), and "A Touch of Class" (1973). Other award-winning performances include Alex in the film "Sunday Bloody Sunday" (1971) and the BBC television serial "Elizabeth R" (also 1971); for the latter, she received a Primetime Emmy Award.

She first became a Member of Parliament (MP) in 1992, as Member for Hampstead and Highgate. Early in the government of Tony Blair, she served as a Junior Transport minister from 1997 to 1999, later becoming critical of Blair. After constituency boundary changes, from 2010 until her retirement from politics in 2015, she represented Hampstead and Kilburn.

At the 2010 general election, her majority of 42 votes was one of the closest results of the entire election. She announced in 2011 that she would stand down as an MP at the 2015 general election.

Jackson was born in Birkenhead on the Wirral, where her father was a builder, and her mother worked in shops and as a cleaner. Jackson was educated at the West Kirby County Grammar School for Girls, and performed at the Townswomen's Guild drama group during her teens. She worked for two years in a branch of the Boots the Chemist chain before taking up a scholarship in 1954 to study at the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art.

Jackson made her professional stage debut in Terence Rattigan's "Separate Tables" in 1957 while at RADA. and appeared in repertory for the next six years. Her film debut was a bit part in "This Sporting Life" (1963). A member of the Royal Shakespeare Company for four years from 1964, she originally joined for director Peter Brook's 'Theatre of Cruelty' season which included Peter Weiss' "Marat/Sade" (1965) in which she played an inmate of an asylum portraying Charlotte Corday, the assassin of Marat. The production ran on Broadway in 1965 and in Paris (Jackson appeared in the 1967 film version) and Jackson also appeared as Ophelia in Peter Hall's production of "Hamlet" in the same year.

Critic Penelope Gilliatt thought Jackson was the only Ophelia she had seen who was ready to play the Prince himself. The RSC's staging at the Aldwych Theatre of "US" (1966), a protest play against the Vietnam War, also featured Jackson, and she appeared in its film version, "Tell Me Lies". Later that year, she starred in the psychological drama "Negatives" (1968), which was not a huge financial success, but won her more good reviews.

Jackson's starring role in Ken Russell's film of "Women in Love" (1969) led to her winning her first Academy Award for Best Actress. Brian McFarlane, the main author of "The Encyclopedia of British Film", has written: "Her blazing intelligence, sexual challenge and abrasiveness were at the service of a superbly written role in a film with a passion rare in the annals of British cinema." In the process of gaining funding for "The Music Lovers" (1970) from United Artists, Russell explained it as "the story of a homosexual who marries a nymphomaniac", the couple being the composer Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky (Richard Chamberlain) and Antonina Miliukova played by Jackson.

This film received mixed reviews in the U.S.: the anonymous reviewer in "Variety" wrote of the two principals "Their performances are more dramatically bombastic than sympathetic, or sometimes even believable". Jackson was initially interested in the role of Sister Jeanne in "The Devils" (1971), Russell's next film, but turned it down after script rewrites and deciding that she did not wish to play a third neurotic character in a row.

In order to play Queen Elizabeth I in the BBC's serial "Elizabeth R" (1971), Jackson had her head shaved. After the series was shown on PBS in the US, Jackson received two Primetime Emmy Awards for her performance. She also portrayed Queen Elizabeth in the film "Mary, Queen of Scots", and gained a BAFTA for her role in John Schlesinger's "Sunday Bloody Sunday" (both 1971). In that year British exhibitors voted her the 6th most popular star at the British box office, and she appeared in a comedy sketch as Cleopatra for "The Morecambe and Wise Show" including delivering the line 'All men are fools and what makes them so is having beauty like what I have got.'

Filmmaker Melvin Frank saw her comedic potential on the Morecambe and Wise Show and offered her the lead female role in his next project. She gained a second Academy Award for Best Actress for "A Touch of Class" (1973). She continued to work in the theatre, and returned to the RSC to play the lead role in Ibsen's "Hedda Gabler". A later film version directed by Nunn was released as "Hedda" (1975) for which Jackson was nominated for an Oscar. In 1978, she scored box office success in the United States in the romantic comedy "House Calls," which co-starred Walter Matthau. Jackson and Matthau teamed again in the comedy "Hopscotch" (1980), which was a mild success, but not as popular as expected.

For her 1980 appearance on "The Muppet Show", she told the producers that she would perform any material they liked; this turned out to be a role where she has a delusion that she is a pirate captain who hijacks the Muppet Theatre as her ship.

In 1985, she appeared on Broadway as Nina Leeds in a revival of Eugene O'Neill's "Strange Interlude" at the Nederlander Theatre in a production which had originated in London the previous year and ran for eight weeks. John Beaufort for "The Christian Science Monitor" wrote: "Bravura is the inevitable word for Miss Jackson's display of feminine wiles and brilliant technique."

Frank Rich, in "The New York Times" thought Jackson, "with her helmet of hair and gashed features", when Leeds is a young woman, "looks like a cubist portrait of Louise Brooks", and later when the character has aged several decades, is "mesmerizing as a Zelda Fitzgeraldesque neurotic, a rotting and spiteful middle-aged matron and, finally, a spent, sphinx-like widow happily embracing extinction." Herbert Wise directed a British television version of O'Neill's drama which was first broadcast in the US as part of PBS's "American Playhouse" in January 1988.

In 1989, Jackson appeared in Ken Russell's "The Rainbow", playing Anna Brangwen, mother of Gudrun, the part which had won her her first Academy Award twenty years earlier. Also in that year she played Martha in a Los Angeles production of Edward Albee's "Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf?" at the Doolittle Theatre (now the Ricardo Montalbán Theatre). Directed by the playwright himself, this staging featured John Lithgow as George. Dan Sullivan in the "Los Angeles Times" wrote that Jackson and Lithgow performed "with the assurance of dedicated character assassins, not your hire-and-salary types" with the actors being able to display their character's capacity for antipathy.

Albee was disappointed with this production, pointing to Jackson who he thought "had retreated back to the thing she can do very well, that ice cold performance. I don't know whether she got scared, but in rehearsal she was being Martha, and the closer we got to opening the less Martha she was!".

She performed the lead role in Howard Barker's "Scenes from an Execution" as Galactia, a sixteenth century female Venetian artist, at the Almeida Theatre in 1990. It was an adaptation of Barker's 1984 radio play in which Jackson had played the same role.

In 2015 Jackson returned to acting following a 23-year absence, having retired from politics. She appeared in the play "Blood Sex and Money" by Émile Zola, which was broadcast on BBC Radio 4, taking the role of Dide, the ancient matriarch of the Rougon-Macquart family. Never one to be scared, she returned to the stage at the end of 2016, playing the title role in Shakespeare's "King Lear" at the Old Vic Theatre in London, in a production running from October 25 to December 3. Jackson was nominated for Best Actress at the Olivier Awards for her role, but ultimately lost out to Billie Piper. She did, however, win the Natasha Richardson Award for Best Actress at the 2017 Evening Standard Theatre Awards for her performance in King Lear at the Old Vic.

Jackson retired from acting in order to stand for election to the House of Commons in the 1992 general election, subsequently becoming the Labour MP for Hampstead and Highgate. Following a period as shadow minister for transport, following the 1997 general election, she was appointed as parliamentary under secretary of state (a junior minister) in the government of Prime Minister Tony Blair, with responsibility for London Transport, a post from which she resigned in 1999 before an unsuccessful attempt to be nominated as the Labour Party candidate for the election of the first Mayor of London in 2000. In the 2005 general election, she received 14,615 votes, representing 38.29% of the votes cast in the constituency.

As a high-profile backbencher, she became a regular critic of Blair over his plans to introduce higher education tuition fees in England, Wales and Northern Ireland. She also called for him to resign following the Judicial Enquiry by Lord Hutton in 2003 surrounding the reasons for going to war in Iraq and the death of government adviser Dr. David Kelly. Jackson was generally considered to be a traditional left-winger, often disagreeing with the dominant Blairite governing Third Way faction in the Labour Party. Jackson is also a republican.

By October 2005, her problems with Blair's leadership swelled to a point where she threatened to challenge the Prime Minister as a stalking horse candidate in a leadership contest if he did not stand down within a reasonable amount of time. On 31 October 2006, Jackson was one of 12 Labour MPs to back Plaid Cymru and the Scottish National Party's call for an inquiry into the Iraq War.

Her constituency boundaries changed for the 2010 general election. The Gospel Oak and Highgate wards became part of Holborn & St Pancras, and the new Hampstead & Kilburn constituency switched into Brent to include Brondesbury, Kilburn and Queens Park wards (from the old Brent East and Brent South seats). On 6 May 2010, Jackson was elected as the MP for the new Hampstead and Kilburn constituency with a margin of 42 votes over Conservative Chris Philp, with the Liberal Democrat candidate Edward Fordham less than a thousand votes behind them. She had the second closest result and second smallest majority of any MP in the 2010 election.

In June 2011, Jackson announced that, presuming the Parliament elected in 2010 lasted until 2015, she would not seek re-election. She explained "I will be almost 80 and by then it will be time for someone else to have a turn". The eventual election was held two days before her 79th birthday.

In April 2013, Jackson gave a speech in parliament following the death of Margaret Thatcher. She accused Thatcher of treating "vices as virtues" and stated that because of Thatcherism England was susceptible to unprecedented unemployment rates and homelessness.

Another speech of Jackson's went viral in June 2014 when she gave a scathing assessment of Iain Duncan Smith's tenure as Secretary of State for Work and Pensions, telling him that he was responsible for the "destruction of the welfare state and the total and utter incompetence of his department."

Jackson has a son, Dan Hodges, born in 1969 from her marriage to Roy Hodges; he has worked as a Labour Party advisor and commentator, and a well-known political blogger who describes himself as a "Blairite cuckoo". She was five months pregnant when filming on "Women in Love" was completed. Her marriage to Hodges lasted from 1958 until their divorce in 1976.

In 1978, she was awarded a CBE.

1971: Academy Award for Best Actress – "Women in Love" (won)

1972: Academy Award for Best Actress – "Sunday Bloody Sunday" (nominated)

1974: Academy Award for Best Actress – "A Touch of Class" (won)

1976: Academy Award for Best Actress – "Hedda" (nominated)

2006: Ibsen Centennial Commemoration Award

2017: Evening Standard Natasha Richardson Award for Best Actress – "King Lear" (won) 



</doc>
<doc id="45794" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45794" title="Janet Gaynor">
Janet Gaynor

Janet Gaynor (born Laura Augusta Gainor; October 6, 1906 – September 14, 1984) was an American film, stage and television actress and painter.

Gaynor began her career as an extra in shorts and silent films. After signing with Fox Film Corporation (later 20th Century-Fox) in 1926, she rose to fame and became one of the biggest box office draws of the era. In 1929, she was the first winner of the Academy Award for Best Actress for her performances in three films: "7th Heaven" (1927), "" (1927), and "Street Angel" (1928). This was the only occasion on which an actress has won one Oscar for multiple film roles. Gaynor's career success continued into the sound film era, and she achieved a notable success in the original version of "A Star Is Born" (1937), for which she received a second Best Actress Academy Award nomination.

After retiring from acting in 1939, Gaynor married film costume designer Adrian with whom she had a son. She briefly returned to acting in films and television in the 1950s and later became an accomplished oil painter. In 1980, Gaynor made her Broadway debut in the stage adaptation of the 1971 film "Harold and Maude" and appeared in the touring production of "On Golden Pond" in February 1982. In September 1982, she sustained multiple injuries in a serious car accident which contributed to her death in September 1984.

Gaynor was born Laura Augusta Gainor (some sources stated Gainer) in Germantown, Philadelphia. Nicknamed "Lolly" as a child, she was the youngest of two daughters born to Laura (Buhl) and Frank De Witt Gainor. Frank Gainor worked as a theatrical painter and paperhanger. When Gaynor was a toddler, her father began teaching her how to sing, dance, and perform acrobatics. As a child in Philadelphia, she began acting in school plays. After her parents divorced in 1914, Gaynor, her sister, and her mother moved to Chicago. Shortly thereafter, her mother married electrician Harry C. Jones.
The family later moved west to San Francisco.

After graduating from San Francisco Polytechnic High School in 1923, Gaynor spent the winter vacationing in Melbourne, Florida, where she did stage work. Upon returning to San Francisco, Gaynor, her mother, and stepfather moved to Los Angeles, where she could pursue an acting career. She was initially hesitant to do so, and enrolled at Hollywood Secretarial School. She supported herself by working in a shoe store and later as a theatre usher. Her mother and stepfather continued to encourage her to become an actress and she began making the rounds to the studios (accompanied by her stepfather) to find film work.

Gaynor won her first professional acting job on December 26, 1924, as an extra in a Hal Roach comedy short. This led to more extra work in feature films and shorts for Film Booking Offices of America and Universal. Universal eventually hired her as a stock player for $50 a week. Six weeks after being hired by Universal, an executive at Fox Film Corporation offered her a screen test for a supporting role in the film "The Johnstown Flood" (1926). Her performance in the film caught the attention of Fox executives, who signed her to a five-year contract and began to cast her in leading roles.
Later that year, Gaynor was selected as one of the WAMPAS Baby Stars (along with Joan Crawford, Dolores del Río, Mary Astor, and others),

By 1927, Gaynor was one of Hollywood's leading ladies. Her image was that of a sweet, wholesome, and pure young woman who was notable for playing her roles with depth and sensitivity. Her performances in "7th Heaven", the first of 12 films she would make with actor Charles Farrell; "Sunrise", directed by F. W. Murnau; and "Street Angel", also with Charles Farrell, earned her the first Academy Award for Best Actress in 1929, when for the first and only time the award was granted for multiple roles, on the basis of total recent work rather than for one particular performance. This practice was prohibited three years later by a new Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences rule. Gaynor was not only the first actress to win the award, but at 22, was also the youngest until 1986, when deaf actress Marlee Matlin, 21, won for her role in "Children of a Lesser God".

Gaynor was one of only a handful of established lead actresses who made a successful transition to sound films. In 1929, she was reteamed with Charles Farrell (the pair was known as "America's favorite love birds") for the musical film "Sunny Side Up".
During the early 1930s, Gaynor was one of Fox's most popular actresses and one of Hollywood's biggest box office draws; in 1931 and 1932, she and Marie Dressler were tied as the number-one draw. After Dressler's death in 1934, Gaynor held the top spot alone. She was often cited as a successor to Mary Pickford, and was cast in remakes of two Pickford films, "Daddy Long Legs" (1931) and "Tess of the Storm Country" (1932). Gaynor drew the line at a proposed remake of "Rebecca of Sunnybrook Farm", which she considered "too juvenile".

Gaynor continued with roles in "State Fair" (1933) with Will Rogers and "The Farmer Takes a Wife" (1935), which introduced Henry Fonda to the screen as Gaynor's leading man. However, when Darryl F. Zanuck merged his fledgling studio, Twentieth Century Pictures, with Fox Film Corporation to form 20th Century-Fox, her status became precarious and even tertiary to those of burgeoning actresses Loretta Young and Shirley Temple. According to press reports at the time, Gaynor held out on signing with the new 20th Century-Fox until her salary was raised from $1,000 a week to $3,000. The studio quickly issued a statement denying that Gaynor was holding out for more money. She quietly signed a new contract, the terms of which were never made public.

Gaynor co-starred in "Ladies in Love" (1937) with Constance Bennett, Loretta Young, and Tyrone Power, but her box office appeal had already begun to wane: once ranked number one, she had dropped to number 24. She considered retiring due to her frustration with studio executives, who continued to cast her in the same type of role that brought her fame while audiences' tastes were changing. After 20th Century-Fox executives proposed that her contract be renegotiated and she be demoted to featured player status, Gaynor left the studio, but her retirement plans were quashed when David O. Selznick offered her the leading role in a new film to be produced by his company, Selznick International. Selznick, who was friendly with Gaynor off-screen, was convinced that audiences would enjoy seeing her portray a character closer to her true personality. He believed that she possessed the perfect combination of humor, charm, vulnerability, and innocence for the role of aspiring actress Esther Blodgett (later "Vicki Lester") in "A Star Is Born". Gaynor accepted the role. The romantic drama was filmed in Technicolor and co-starred Fredric March. Released in 1937, it was an enormous hit and earned Gaynor her second Academy Award nomination for Best Actress; she lost to Luise Rainer for "The Good Earth".

"A Star Is Born" revitalized Gaynor's career, and she was cast in the screwball comedy "The Young in Heart" with Paulette Goddard. That film was a modest hit, but by then Gaynor had definitely decided to retire. She later explained, "I had been working steadily for 17 long years, making movies was really all I knew of life. I just wanted to have time to know other things. Most of all I wanted to fall in love. I wanted to get married. I wanted a child. And I knew that in order to have these things one had to make time for them. So I simply stopped making movies. Then as if by a miracle, everything I really wanted happened." At the top of the industry, she retired at age 33.

In August 1939, Gaynor married Hollywood costume designer Adrian with whom she had a son in 1940. The couple divided their time between their 250-acre cattle ranch in Anapolis, Brazil, and their homes in New York and California. Both were also heavily involved in the fashion and arts community. Gaynor returned to acting in the early 1950s with appearances in live television anthology series including "Medallion Theatre", "Lux Video Theatre", and "General Electric Theater". In 1957, she appeared in her final film role as Dick Sargent's mother in the musical comedy "Bernardine", starring Pat Boone and Terry Moore. In November 1959, she made her stage debut in the play "The Midnight Sun", in New Haven, Connecticut. The play, which Gaynor later called "a disaster", was not well received and closed shortly after its debut.

Gaynor also became an accomplished oil painter of vegetable and flower still lifes. She sold over 200 paintings and had four showings under the Wally Findlay Galleries banner in New York, Chicago, and Palm Beach from 1975 to February 1982.

In 1980, Gaynor made her Broadway debut as "Maude" in the stage adaptation of the 1971 film "Harold and Maude". She received good reviews for her performance, but the play was panned by critics and closed after 21 performances. Later that year, she reunited with her "Servants' Entrance" co-star Lew Ayres to film an episode of the anthology series "The Love Boat". It was the first television appearance Gaynor had made since the 1950s and was her last screen role. In February 1982, she starred in the touring production of "On Golden Pond". This was her final acting role.

Gaynor was married three times and had one child. Her first marriage was to lawyer Jesse Lydell Peck, whom she married on September 11, 1929. Gaynor's attorney announced the couple's separation in late December 1932. She was granted a divorce on April 7, 1933. On August 14, 1939, she married MGM costume designer Gilbert Adrian in Yuma, Arizona. This relationship has been called a lavender marriage, since Adrian was openly gay within the film community while Gaynor was rumored to be gay or bisexual. The couple had one son, Robin Gaynor Adrian, born in 1940. Those rumors were never hinted at in newspapers or magazines. Gaynor and Adrian remained married until Adrian's death from a stroke on September 13, 1959.

On December 24, 1964, Gaynor married her longtime friend, stage producer Paul Gregory, to whom she remained married until her death. The two maintained a home in Desert Hot Springs, California and also owned 3,000 acres of land near Brasília.

Gaynor and her husband traveled frequently with her close friend Mary Martin and her husband. Actor Bob Cummings allegedly once quipped: "Janet Gaynor's husband was Adrian, but her wife was Mary Martin". A Brazilian press report noted that Gaynor and Martin briefly lived with their respective husbands in Anapolis, state of Goiás in a ranch (fazenda in portuguese) in the 1950s and 1960s both houses still there nowadays.There is a project of restoration of their houses by Jan Magalinski Istitute to make the Cinema museum of Goiás

On the evening of September 5, 1982, Gaynor, her husband Paul Gregory, actress Mary Martin, and Martin's manager Ben Washer were involved in a serious car accident in San Francisco. A van ran a red light at the corner of California and Franklin Streets and crashed into the Luxor taxicab in which the group was riding, knocking it into a tree. Ben Washer was killed, Mary Martin sustained two broken ribs and a broken pelvis, and Gaynor's husband suffered two broken legs. Gaynor sustained several serious injuries, including 11 broken ribs, a fractured collarbone, pelvic fractures, a punctured lung, and injuries to her bladder and kidney. The driver of the van, Robert Cato, was arrested on two counts of felony drunk driving, reckless driving, speeding, running a red light, and vehicular homicide. Cato pleaded not guilty and was later released on $10,000 bail. On March 15, 1983, he was found guilty of drunk driving and vehicular homicide and was sentenced to three years in prison.

As a result of her injuries, Gaynor was hospitalized for four months and underwent two surgeries to repair a perforated bladder and internal bleeding. She recovered sufficiently to return to her home in Desert Hot Springs, but continued to experience health issues due to the injuries and required frequent hospitalizations. Shortly before her death, she was hospitalized for pneumonia and other ailments. On September 14, 1984, Gaynor died at Desert Hospital in Palm Springs at the age of 77. Her doctor, Bart Apfelbaum, attributed her death to the 1982 car accident and stated that Gaynor "...never recovered" from her injuries.

Gaynor is buried at Hollywood Forever Cemetery next to her second husband Adrian. Her headstone reads "Janet Gaynor Gregory", her legal name after her marriage to her third husband, producer and director Paul Gregory.

For her contribution to the motion picture industry, Janet Gaynor has a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame at 6284 Hollywood Blvd.

On March 1, 1978, Howard W. Koch, then the president of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences, presented Gaynor with a citation for her "truly immeasurable contribution to the art of motion pictures".

In 1979, Gaynor was awarded the Order of the Southern Cross for her cultural contributions to Brazil.



</doc>
<doc id="180982" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=180982" title="Joan Fontaine">
Joan Fontaine

Joan de Beauvoir de Havilland (October 22, 1917 – December 15, 2013), known professionally as Joan Fontaine, was a British-American actress best known for her starring roles in Hollywood films. Fontaine appeared in more than 45 feature films in a career that spanned five decades. She was the younger sister of actress Olivia de Havilland.

Born in Tokyo to British parents, Fontaine moved to California with her mother, Lilian Fontaine, and sister, the actress Olivia de Havilland, following her parents' divorce. She was anaemic as a child, and her childhood was consequently marred by poor health, but she had improved by her teen years. After living in Japan and attending school there for a short while, she began her stage career in 1935, signing a film contract with RKO Pictures. Fontaine received her first major role in "The Man Who Found Himself" (1937); however, she failed to make a significant impression and her contract was not renewed.

Her career prospects improved greatly after her starring role in the Alfred Hitchcock-directed "Rebecca" (1940), for which she received the first of what would be three nominations for the Academy Award for Best Actress; the following year, she won for her role in "Suspicion" (1941). A third Oscar nomination came with the film "The Constant Nymph". She appeared mostly in drama films through the 1940s—including "Letter from an Unknown Woman", which is now considered a classic. In the next decade, her career began to decline and she moved into stage and television roles. She appeared in fewer films into the 1960s, her final feature film being "The Witches" (1966).

Fontaine was active in radio, television, and the stage for most of her middle to later life. She released an autobiography, "No Bed of Roses", in 1978; she continued to act until her last performance in 1994. Fontaine lived in Carmel Highlands, California, where she owned a home, Villa Fontana. She died there of natural causes at the age of 96 in 2013. Having won an Academy Award for her role in "Suspicion", Fontaine is the only actor to have won an Academy Award for acting in a Hitchcock film. Furthermore, she and her sister remain the only siblings to have won major acting Academy Awards.

Married four times, she had one child by birth and one child by adoption, from whom she was later estranged. Her relationship with her sister was long known to be acrimonious, and included long periods of estrangement, especially in later life.

Joan de Beauvoir deHavilland was born on 22 October 1917, in Tokyo, Japan, to English parents. Her father, Walter de Havilland (1872–1968), was educated at the University of Cambridge and served as an English professor at the Imperial University in Tokyo before becoming a patent attorney. Her mother, Lilian Augusta Ruse de Havilland Fontaine (1886–1975), was educated at the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art in London, and became a stage actress who left her career after going to Tokyo with her husband. Her mother returned to work with the stage name "Lillian Fontaine" after her daughters achieved prominence in the 1940s. Joan's paternal cousin was Sir Geoffrey de Havilland (1882–1965), an aircraft designer known for the de Havilland Mosquito, and founder of the aircraft company which bore his name. Her paternal grandfather, the Reverend Charles Richard deHavilland, was from a family from Guernsey, in the Channel Islands.

De Havilland's parents married in 1914 and separated in 1919, when Lilian decided to end the marriage after discovering that her husband used the sexual services of geishas; the divorce was not finalised, however, until February 1925.

Taking a physician's advice, Lilian deHavilland moved Joanreportedly a sickly child who had developed anaemia following a combined attack of the measles and a streptococcal infectionand her elder sister, Olivia de Havilland, to the United States. The family settled in Saratoga, California, and Fontaine's health improved dramatically. She was educated at nearby Los Gatos High School, and was soon taking diction lessons alongside her elder sister. When she was 16 years old, deHavilland returned to Japan to live with her father. There she attended the Tokyo School for Foreign Children, graduating in 1935.

Fontaine made her stage debut in the West Coast production of "Call It a Day" (1935) and was soon signed to an RKO contract. Her film debut was a small role in "No More Ladies" (also 1935) in which she was credited as Joan Burfield.

Although Fontaine, under contract with RKO, had already made her screen appearance in "No More Ladies", a series of other minor roles followed, in "A Million to One" and "Quality Street" (both 1937), opposite Katharine Hepburn. The studio considered her a rising star, and touted "The Man Who Found Himself" (also 1937) as her first starring role, placing a special screen introduction, billed as the "new RKO screen personality" after the end credit. She next appeared in a major role alongside Fred Astaire in his first RKO film without Ginger Rogers, "A Damsel in Distress" (1937), but audiences were disappointed and the film flopped. She continued appearing in small parts in about a dozen films, including "The Women" (1939), but failed to make a strong impression, and her contract was not renewed when it expired in 1939.

Fontaine's luck changed one night at a dinner party when she found herself seated next to producer David O. Selznick. Selznick and she began discussing the Daphne du Maurier novel "Rebecca", and Selznick asked her to audition for the part of the unnamed heroine. She endured a grueling six-month series of film tests, along with hundreds of other actresses, before securing the part sometime before her 22nd birthday.

"Rebecca" (1940), starring Laurence Olivier alongside Fontaine, marked the American debut of British director Alfred Hitchcock. The film was released to glowing reviews, and Fontaine was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Actress. Fontaine did not win that year (Ginger Rogers took home the award for "Kitty Foyle"), but she did win the following year for Best Actress in "Suspicion", which co-starred Cary Grant and was also directed by Hitchcock. This was the only Academy Award-winning acting performance to have been directed by Hitchcock.

During the 1940s, Fontaine excelled in romantic melodramas. In 1943, She starred along with Charles Boyer in "The Constant Nymph". She was nominated for a third Academy Award for her performance in this film. She also starred as the titular protagonist in the film "Jane Eyre" that year.

She starred in the film "Frenchman's Creek" (1944). Like "Rebecca", this was also based on a novel by Daphne du Maurier. Fontaine personally considered "Frenchman's Creek" one of her least favorites among the films she starred in.

The most memorable film Fontaine starred in during the late 1940s is "Letter from an Unknown Woman" (1948) directed by Max Ophüls and is today considered to be a classic with one of the finest performance in her career. 

Although she is mostly remembered for her performances in the two Hitchcock films and the romantic melodramas she starred in throughout the 1940s, she starred in a wide variety of genres, like the comedy film "The Affairs of Susan" (1945), the musical film "The Emperor Waltz" (1948) directed by Billy Wilder and co-starring Joseph Cotten), the film noir "Kiss the Blood Off My Hands" (also 1948) co-starring Burt Lancaster, and the adventure drama "Ivanhoe" (1952), which also starred Robert Taylor and Elizabeth Taylor. Although she was often cast as good-natured and naive characters or aristocrats, she played unsympathetic characters in films like "Ivy" (1947) and "Born to Be Bad" (1950). 

Her film successes slowed a little during the 1950s, and she also began appearing in television and on the stage. She won good reviews for her role on Broadway in 1954 as Laura in "Tea and Sympathy", opposite Anthony Perkins. She also appeared in numerous radio shows during the 1940s for the "Lux Radio Theatre".

During the 1960s, Fontaine appeared in several stage productions, including "Private Lives", "Cactus Flower" and an Austrian production of "The Lion in Winter". Her last theatrical film was "The Witches" (1966), which she also co-produced. She continued appearing in film and television roles throughout the 1970s and 1980s, and was nominated for an Emmy Award for the soap opera "Ryan's Hope" in 1980.

Fontaine's autobiography, "No Bed of Roses", was published in 1978. In 1982, she traveled to Berlin, Germany and served as a jury president for the Berlin International Film Festival.

Fontaine's last role for television was in the 1994 TV film "Good King Wenceslas", after which she retired to her estate, Villa Fontana, in Carmel Highlands, California, where she spent time in her gardens and with her dogs.

For her contribution to the motion picture industry, Fontaine has a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame at 1645 Vine Street. She left her hand and foot prints in front of the Grauman's Chinese Theatre on 26 May 1942.

She was a devout Episcopalian and a member of Episcopal Actors Guild.

Fontaine was a Democrat who not only supported the run of Adlai Stevenson but also had a personal relationship as well, stating,We had a tenderness for each other that grew into something rather serious. There was so much speculation about our marrying in the press that over lunch at his apartment in the Waldorf Towers he told me he could not marry an actress. He still had political ambitions and the “little old ladies from Oshkosh” wouldn’t approve. I told him it was just as well. My family would hardly approve of my marrying a politician.

Fontaine held dual citizenship; she was British by birthright (both her parents were British) and became an American citizen in April 1943. Outside of acting, Fontaine was also noted as being a licensed pilot, an accomplished interior decorator, and a Cordon Bleu-level chef.

Fontaine was married and divorced four times. Her first marriage was to actor Brian Aherne, in 1939 in Del Monte, California; they divorced in April 1945. In May 1946, she married actor/producer William Dozier in Mexico City. They had a daughter, Deborah Leslie, in 1948, and separated in 1949. Deborah is Fontaine's only biological child. The following year, Fontaine filed for divorce, charging Dozier with desertion. Their divorce was finalized in January 1951. Fontaine's third marriage was to producer and writer Collier Young on November 12, 1952. They separated in May 1960, and Fontaine filed for divorce in November 1960. Their divorce was finalized in January 1961. Fontaine's fourth and final marriage was to "Sports Illustrated" golf editor Alfred Wright, Jr, on January 23, 1964, in Elkton, Maryland; they divorced in 1969.

While in South America for a film festival in 1951, Fontaine met a four-year-old Peruvian girl named Martita, and informally adopted her. Fontaine met Martita while visiting Incan ruins where Martita's father worked as a caretaker. Martita's parents allowed Fontaine to become Martita's legal guardian to give the child a better life. Fontaine promised Martita's parents she would send the girl back to Peru to visit when she was 16 years old. When Martita turned 16, Fontaine bought her a round-trip ticket to Peru, but Martita refused to go and opted to run away. Fontaine and Martita became estranged following the incident. While promoting her autobiography in 1978, Fontaine addressed the issue, stating, "Until my adopted daughter goes back to see her parents, she's not welcome. I promised her parents. I do not forgive somebody who makes me break my word."

Fontaine and her sister, Olivia deHavilland, are the only set of siblings to have won lead acting Academy Awards. Olivia was the first to become an actress; when Fontaine tried to follow her lead, their mother, who allegedly favored Olivia, refused to let Joan use the family name. Subsequently, Fontaine had to invent a name, taking first Joan Burfield, and later Joan Fontaine. Biographer Charles Higham records that the sisters had an uneasy relationship from early childhood, when Olivia would rip up the clothes Joan had to wear as hand-me-downs, forcing Joan to sew them back together. A large part of the friction between the sisters allegedly stemmed from Fontaine's belief that Olivia was their mother's favorite child.

De Havilland and Fontaine were both nominated for the Academy Award for Best Actress in 1942. Fontaine won for her role in Alfred Hitchcock's "Suspicion" over deHavilland's performance in "Hold Back the Dawn". Higham states that Fontaine "felt guilty about winning given her lack of obsessive career drive...". Higham has described the events of the awards ceremony, stating that as Fontaine stepped forward to collect her award, she pointedly rejected deHavilland's attempts at congratulating her and that deHavilland was both offended and embarrassed by her behavior. Fontaine, however, tells a different story in her autobiography, explaining that she was paralyzed with surprise when she won the Academy Award, and that deHavilland insisted she get up to accept it. "Olivia took the situation very graciously," Fontaine wrote. "I was appalled that I'd won over my sister." Several years later, however, deHavilland apparently remembered what she perceived as a slight and exacted her own revenge by brushing past Fontaine, who was waiting with her hand extended, because deHavilland allegedly took offense at a comment Fontaine had made about deHavilland's husband.

Contrary to press reports, the sisters continued their relationship after the 1940s. After Fontaine's separation from her husband in 1952, deHavilland came to her apartment in New York often, and at least once they spent Christmas together there, in 1961. They were photographed laughing together at a party for Marlene Dietrich in 1967. Fontaine also went to visit deHavilland in Paris in 1969.

The sisters reportedly did not completely stop speaking to each other until 1975, after their mother's funeral, to which Joan, who was out of the country, was not invited.

Both sisters largely refused to comment publicly about their relationship. In a 1978 interview, however, Fontaine said of the sibling rivalry, "I married first, won the Oscar before Olivia did, and if I die first, she'll undoubtedly be livid because I beat her to it!" The following year, in a 1979 interview, Fontaine claimed the reason her sister and she stopped speaking to each other was that deHavilland wanted their mother (who was suffering from cancer) to be treated surgically at the advanced age of 88, which Fontaine apparently did not think was a good idea. Fontaine claims that after their mother died, deHavilland did not bother to try to find where Fontaine could be reached (Fontaine was on tour in a play). Instead, deHavilland sent a telegram, which did not arrive until two weeks later at Fontaine's next stop. According to Fontaine, deHavilland did not invite her to a memorial service for their mother. DeHavilland claims she informed Fontaine, but Fontaine brushed her off, claiming she was too busy to attend. Higham records that Fontaine had an estranged relationship with her own daughters, as well, possibly because she discovered that they were secretly maintaining a relationship with deHavilland.

On December 15, 2013, Fontaine died in her sleep of natural causes at the age of 96 in her Carmel Highlands home. Her longtime friend Noel Beutel said, "She had been fading in recent days and died peacefully." After Fontaine's death, deHavilland released a statement saying she was "shocked and saddened" by the news. Fontaine was cremated.

Fontaine's Academy Award for Best Actress in "Suspicion" was initially going to be sold at an animal rights auction; however, the Academy threatened to sue since it was not offered back to them for $1 and Fontaine's estate retained possession.



</doc>
<doc id="187074" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=187074" title="Judy Holliday">
Judy Holliday

Judy Holliday (Born Judith Tuvim, June 21, 1921 – June 7, 1965) was an American actress, comedian, and singer.

She began her career as part of a nightclub act before working in Broadway plays and musicals. Her success in the 1946 stage production of "Born Yesterday" as Billie Dawn led to her being cast in the 1950 film version for which she won an Academy Award for Best Actress and a Golden Globe Award for Best Actress – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy. She appeared in several films during the 1950s. She was noted for her performance on Broadway in the musical "Bells Are Ringing," winning a Tony Award for Best Performance by a Leading Actress in a Musical and reprising her role in the 1960 film.

In 1952, Holliday was called to testify before the Senate Internal Security Subcommittee to answer claims she was associated with communism.

Holliday was born Judith Tuvim (Hebrew: "tovim" means good, Yiddish: "yomtoyvim" means holidays, lit. ""good days"") in New York City, she was the only child of Abe Tuvim and Helen (née Gollomb) Tuvim, a piano teacher, who were both of Russian Jewish descent. Her father was the Executive Director of the Foundation for the Jewish National Fund of America (1951–1958, his death from cancer).

She grew up in Sunnyside, Queens, New York, and graduated from Julia Richman High School. Her mother was previously divorced.

Holliday's first job was as an assistant switchboard operator at the Mercury Theatre run by Orson Welles and John Houseman.

Holliday began her show business career in 1938, under her original name, as part of a nightclub act called The Revuers. The other members of the group were Betty Comden, Adolph Green, Alvin Hammer, John Frank and Esther Cohen. The Revuers played engagements in New York night clubs including the Village Vanguard, Spivy's Roof, Blue Angel, Rainbow Room, and Trocadero in Hollywood, California. The group disbanded in early 1944.

Her first film role was a small, but noticeable role as an airman's wife in the Twentieth Century Fox film version of the U.S. Army Air Forces' play "Winged Victory" (1944). She did not appear in the stage version, which toured the U.S. both before and after production of the film. Holliday made her Broadway debut on March 20, 1945 at the Belasco Theatre in "Kiss Them for Me" and was one of the recipients that year of the Clarence Derwent Award.

In 1946, she returned to Broadway as the scatterbrained Billie Dawn in "Born Yesterday". Author Garson Kanin wrote the play for Jean Arthur, who played the role of Billie out-of-town but left the role for personal reasons. Kanin then selected Holliday, two decades Arthur's junior, as her replacement. In his book "Tracy and Hepburn" (1971), Kanin mentions that when Columbia bought the rights to the film "Born Yesterday," studio boss Harry Cohn would not consider casting the Hollywood-unknown. Kanin, along with George Cukor, Spencer Tracy, and Katharine Hepburn conspired to promote Holliday by offering her a key part in the film "Adam's Rib" (1949).

She received rave reviews for her performance in "Born Yesterday" on Broadway, and Cohn offered her the chance to repeat her role for the film version, but only after she did a screen test (which at first was used only as a "benchmark against which to evaluate" other actresses being considered for the role). She won the first Golden Globe Award for Best Actress – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy and at the 23rd Academy Awards, Holliday won the Academy Award for Best Actress, defeating Gloria Swanson, nominated for "Sunset Boulevard", Eleanor Parker, for "Caged", and Bette Davis and Anne Baxter, both for "All About Eve".

She starred opposite then-newcomer Jack Lemmon in his first two feature films, the popular comedies "It Should Happen to You" and "Phffft!" (both 1954)

Bernard Dick summed up Holliday's acting: "Perhaps the most important aspect of the Judy Holliday persona, both in variations of Billie Dawn and in her roles as housewife, is her vulnerability...her ability to shift her mood quickly from comic to serious is one of her greatest technical gifts".

George Cukor said Holliday had, "In common with the great comedians ...that depth of emotion, that unexpectedly touching emotion, that thing which would unexpectedly touch your heart."

In 1950, Holliday was the subject of an FBI investigation looking into allegations she was a Communist. The investigation "did "not" reveal positive evidence of any membership in the Communist Party" and was concluded after three months, unlike many others tainted by the Communist investigation. In 1952, she was called to testify before the Senate Internal Security Subcommittee to "explain" why her name had been linked to Communist front organizations. She was advised to play dumb (like some of her film characters), which she did very well.

She starred in the film version of "The Solid Gold Cadillac", which was released in August 1956.

In November 1956, Holliday returned to Broadway starring in the musical "Bells Are Ringing" with book and lyrics by her Revuers friends, Betty Comden and Adolph Green, and directed by Jerome Robbins. In 1957, she won the Tony Award for Best Leading Actress in a Musical. Of her performance in the stage musical Brooks Atkinson wrote in "The New York Times";Nothing has happened to the shrill little moll whom the town loved in "Born Yesterday". The squeaky voice, the embarrassed giggle, the brassy naivete, the dimples, the teeter-totter walk fortunately remain unimpaired ... Miss Holliday now adds a trunk-full of song-and-dance routines...Without losing any of that doll-like personality, she is now singing music by Jule Styne and dancing numbers composed by Jerome Robbins and Bob Fosse. She has gusto enough to triumph in every kind of music hall antic. Returning to her film career after a gap of several years, she starred in the film version of "Bells Are Ringing" (1960), her last film.

In October 1960, Holliday started out-of-town tryouts on the play "Laurette" based on the life of Laurette Taylor. The show was directed by José Quintero with background music by Elmer Bernstein and produced by Alan Pakula. When Holliday became ill and had to leave the show, it closed in Philadelphia without opening on Broadway.

She had throat surgery shortly after leaving the production in October 1960.

Her last role was in the stage musical "Hot Spot", co-starring newcomers such as Joseph Campanella and Mary Louise Wilson, which closed after 43 performances on May 25, 1963.

In 1948, Holliday married clarinetist, and later classical music and television producer and academic David Oppenheim, with whom she had a son, film editor Jonathan Oppenheim, before the couple divorced in 1958. She had a long-term relationship with jazz musician Gerry Mulligan, but the couple never married. She supplied lyrics to Mulligan's theme song for the movie "A Thousand Clowns" (1965), her final film credit.

She died from breast cancer on June 7, 1965, fourteen days before her 44th birthday. She was interred in the Westchester Hills Cemetery in Hastings-on-Hudson, New York.

Holliday has a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame at 6901 Hollywood Blvd, awarded on February 8, 1960.

"Source:"
"Source:"
Holliday recorded two studio albums (not including her film and Broadway soundtracks) during her lifetime.




</doc>
<doc id="163347" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=163347" title="Julie Christie">
Julie Christie

Julie Frances Christie (born 14 April 1940) is a British actress. An icon of the "swinging London" era of the 1960s, she has won the Academy, Golden Globe, BAFTA, and Screen Actors Guild Awards. Christie appeared in six films that were ranked in the British Film Institute's 100 greatest British films of the 20th century, and in 1997 she received the BAFTA Fellowship.

Christie's breakthrough film role was in "Billy Liar" (1963). She came to international attention for her performances in "Darling" (1965), for which she won the Academy Award for Best Actress, and "Doctor Zhivago" (also 1965), the eighth highest-grossing film of all time after adjustment for inflation.

In the following years, she starred in "Fahrenheit 451" (1966), "Far from the Madding Crowd" (1967), "Petulia" (1968), "The Go-Between" (1971), "McCabe & Mrs. Miller" (1971), for which she received her second Oscar nomination, "Don't Look Now" (1973), "Shampoo" (1975), and "Heaven Can Wait" (1978).

From the early 1980s, her appearances in mainstream films decreased, though she held roles as Thetis in Wolfgang Petersen's historical epic "Troy" and in "Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban" (both 2004). She has continued to receive significant critical recognition for her work, including Oscar nominations for the independent films "Afterglow" (1997) and "Away from Her" (2007).

Christie was born on 14 April 1940 at Singlijan Tea Estate, Chabua, Assam, British India, the elder child of Rosemary (née Ramsden; 1912–1982), a painter, and Francis "Frank" St. John Christie (1904–1963). Her father ran the tea plantation where she was raised. She has a younger brother, Clive, and an older (now deceased) half-sister, June, from her father's relationship with an Indian woman, who worked as a tea picker on his plantation. Frank and Rosemary Christie separated when Julie was a child.

She was baptised in the Church of England, and studied as a boarder at the independent Convent of Our Lady school in St. Leonards-on-Sea, East Sussex, after being expelled from another convent school for telling a risqué joke that reached a wider audience than originally anticipated. After being asked to leave the Convent of Our Lady as well, she later attended Wycombe Court School, High Wycombe, Buckinghamshire, during which time she lived with a foster mother from the age of six.

After her parents' divorce, Christie spent time with her mother in rural Wales. As a teenager at the all-girls' Wycombe Court School, she played "the Dauphin" in a production of Shaw's "Saint Joan". She later studied at the Central School of Speech and Drama.

Christie made her professional stage debut in 1957, and her first screen roles were on British television. Her earliest role to gain attention was in BBC serial "A for Andromeda" (1961). She was a contender for the role of Honey Rider in the first James Bond film, "Dr. No", but producer Albert R. Broccoli reportedly thought her breasts were too small.

Christie appeared in two comedies for Independent Artists: "Crooks Anonymous" and "The Fast Lady" (both 1962). Her breakthrough role, however, was as Liz, the friend and would-be lover of the character played by Tom Courtenay in "Billy Liar" (1963), for which she received a BAFTA Award nomination. The director, John Schlesinger cast Christie only after another actress, Topsy Jane, had dropped out of the film. Christie appeared as Daisy Battles in "Young Cassidy" (1965), a biopic of Irish playwright Seán O'Casey, co-directed by Jack Cardiff and (uncredited) John Ford.

Her role as an amoral model in "Darling" (also 1965) led to Christie becoming known internationally. Directed by Schlesinger, and co-starring Dirk Bogarde and Laurence Harvey, Christie had only been cast in the lead role after Schlesinger insisted, the studio having wanted Shirley MacLaine. She received the Academy Award for Best Actress and the BAFTA Award for Best British Actress in a Leading Role for her performance.

In David Lean's "Doctor Zhivago" (also 1965), adapted from the epic/romance novel by Boris Pasternak, Christie's role as Lara Antipova became her best known. The film was a major box-office success. As of 2016, "Doctor Zhivago" is the 8th highest-grossing film of all time, adjusted for inflation. According to "Life" magazine, 1965 was "The Year of Julie Christie".

After dual roles in François Truffaut's adaptation of the Ray Bradbury novel "Fahrenheit 451" (1966), starring with Oskar Werner, she appeared as Thomas Hardy's heroine Bathsheba Everdene in Schlesinger's "Far from the Madding Crowd" (1967). After moving to Los Angeles in 1967 ("I was there because of a lot of American boyfriends"), she appeared in the title role of Richard Lester's "Petulia" (1968), co-starring with George C. Scott.

Christie's persona as the swinging sixties British woman she had embodied in "Billy Liar" and "Darling" was further cemented by her appearance in the documentary "Tonite Let's All Make Love in London". In 1967, "Time" magazine said of her: "What Julie Christie wears has more real impact on fashion than all the clothes of the ten best-dressed women combined".

In Joseph Losey's romantic drama "The Go-Between" (1971), Christie had a lead role along with Alan Bates. The film won the Grand Prix, then the main award at the Cannes Film Festival. She earned a second Best Actress Oscar nomination for her role as a brothel madame in Robert Altman's postmodern western "McCabe & Mrs. Miller" (also 1971). The film was the first of three collaborations between Christie and Warren Beatty, who described her as "the most beautiful and at the same time the most nervous person I had ever known". The couple had a high-profile but intermittent relationship between 1967 and 1974. After the relationship ended, they worked together again in the comedies "Shampoo" (1975) and "Heaven Can Wait" (1978).

Her other films during the decade were Nicolas Roeg's thriller "Don't Look Now " (1973), in which she co-starred with Donald Sutherland, and the science-fiction/horror film "Demon Seed" (1977), based on the novel of the same name by Dean Koontz and directed by Donald Cammell. "Don't Look Now" in particular has received acclaim, with Christie nominated for the BAFTA Award for Best Actress in a Leading Role, and in 2017 a poll of 150 actors, directors, writers, producers and critics for "Time Out" magazine saw it ranked the greatest British film ever.

Christie returned to the United Kingdom in 1977, living on a farm in Wales. In 1979, she was a member of the jury at the 29th Berlin International Film Festival. Never a prolific actress, even at the height of her career, Christie turned down many high-caliber film roles, including "Anne of the Thousand Days", "They Shoot Horses, Don't They?", "Nicholas and Alexandra", and "Reds", all of which earned Oscar nominations for the actresses who eventually played them.

In the 1980s, Christie appeared in non-mainstream films such as "The Return of the Soldier" (1982) and "Heat and Dust" (1983). She had a major supporting role in Sidney Lumet's "Power" (1986) alongside Richard Gere and Gene Hackman, but apart from that, she avoided large budget films. She starred in the television film "Dadah Is Death" (1988), based on the Barlow and Chambers execution, as Barlow's mother Barbara, who desperately fought to save her son from being hanged for drug trafficking in Malaysia.

After a lengthy absence from the screen, Christie co-starred in the fantasy adventure film "DragonHeart" (1996), and appeared as Gertrude in Kenneth Branagh's "Hamlet" (also 1996). Her next critically acclaimed role was the unhappy wife in Alan Rudolph's domestic comedy-drama "Afterglow" (1997) with Nick Nolte, Jonny Lee Miller and Lara Flynn Boyle. Christie received a third Oscar nomination for her role. 

Appearing in six films that were ranked in the British Film Institute's 100 greatest British films of the 20th century, in recognition of her contribution to British cinema Christie received BAFTA's highest honour, the Fellowship in 1997.

Christie made a brief cameo appearance in the third "Harry Potter" film, "Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban" (2004), playing Madam Rosmerta. Around the same time, she also appeared in two other high-profile films: Wolfgang Petersen's "Troy" and Marc Forster's "Finding Neverland" (both 2004), playing mother to Brad Pitt and Kate Winslet, respectively. The latter performance earned Christie a BAFTA nomination as supporting actress in film.
Christie portrayed the female lead in "Away from Her" (2006), a film about a long-married Canadian couple coping with the wife's Alzheimer's disease. Based on the Alice Munro short story "The Bear Came Over the Mountain", the movie was the first feature film directed by Christie's sometime co-star, Canadian actress Sarah Polley. She took the role, she says, only because Polley is her friend. Polley has said Christie liked the script but initially turned it down as she was ambivalent about acting. It took several months of persuasion by Polley before Christie finally accepted the role.

In July 2006 she was a member of the jury at the 28th Moscow International Film Festival. Debuting at the Toronto International Film Festival on 11 September 2006 as part of the TIFF's Gala showcase, "Away from Her" drew rave reviews from the trade press, including "The Hollywood Reporter", and the four Toronto dailies. Critics singled out her performances as well as that of her co-star, Canadian actor Gordon Pinsent, and Polley's direction. Christie's performance generated Oscar buzz, leading the distributor, Lions Gate Entertainment, to buy the film at the festival to release the film in 2007 to build momentum during the awards season.

On 5 December 2007, she won the Best Actress Award from the National Board of Review for her performance in "Away from Her". She won the Golden Globe Award for Best Actress - Motion Picture Drama, the Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Leading Role and the Genie Award for Best Actress for the same film. On 22 January 2008, Christie received her fourth Oscar nomination for Best Performance by an Actress in a Leading Role at the 80th Academy Awards. She appeared at the ceremony wearing a pin calling for the closure of the prison in Guantanamo Bay.

Christie narrated "Uncontacted Tribes" (2008), a short film for the British-based charity Survival International, featuring previously unseen footage of remote and endangered peoples. She has been a long-standing supporter of the charity, and in February 2008, was named as its first 'Ambassador'. She appeared in a segment of the film, "New York, I Love You" (also 2008), written by Anthony Minghella, directed by Shekhar Kapur and co-starring Shia LaBeouf, as well as in "Glorious 39" (2009), about a British family at the start of World War II.

Christie played a "sexy, bohemian" version of the grandmother role in Catherine Hardwicke's gothic retelling of "Red Riding Hood" (2011). Her most recent role was in the political thriller "The Company You Keep" (2012), where she co-starred with Robert Redford and Sam Elliott.

In the early 1960s, Christie dated actor Terence Stamp. She was engaged to Don Bessant, a lithographer and art teacher, in 1965, before dating actor Warren Beatty for several years. She is married to "The Guardian" journalist Duncan Campbell; they have lived together since 1979, but the date they wed is disputed. In January 2008, several news outlets reported that the couple had quietly married in India two months earlier, in November 2007, which Christie called "nonsense", adding, "I have been married for a few years. Don't believe what you read in the papers."

In the late 1960s, her advisers adopted a very complex scheme in an attempt to reduce her tax liability, giving rise to the leading case of "Black Nominees Ltd v Nicol (Inspector of Taxes)". The case was heard by Templeman J (who later became Lord Templeman), who gave judgment in favour of the Inland Revenue, ruling that the scheme was ineffective.

She is also active in various causes, including animal rights, environmental protection, and the anti-nuclear power movement and is also a Patron of the Palestine Solidarity Campaign, as well as Reprieve, and CFS/ME charity Action for ME.





</doc>
<doc id="183759" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=183759" title="Loretta Young">
Loretta Young

Gretchen "Loretta" Young (January 6, 1913 – August 12, 2000) was an American actress. Starting as a child actress, she had a long and varied career in film from 1917 to 1953. She won the 1948 Academy Award for Best Actress for her role in the 1947 film "The Farmer's Daughter" and received an Oscar nomination for her role in "Come to the Stable" in 1949. Young moved to the relatively new medium of television, where she had a dramatic anthology series, "The Loretta Young Show", from 1953 to 1961. The series earned three Emmy Awards and was rerun successfully on daytime TV and later in syndication. In the 1980s, Young returned to the small screen and won a Golden Globe for her role in "Christmas Dove" in 1986. Young, a devout Roman Catholic, worked with various Catholic charities after her acting career.

She was born Gretchen Young in Salt Lake City, Utah, the daughter of Gladys (née Royal) and John Earle Young. At confirmation, she took the name Michaela. When she was two years old, her parents separated, and when she was three, her family and she moved to Hollywood. Her sisters Polly Ann and Elizabeth Jane (better known as Sally Blane) and she worked as child actresses, but of the three, Gretchen was the most successful.

Young's first role was at the age of three, in the silent film "The Primrose Ring". During her high-school years, she was educated at Ramona Convent Secondary School. She was signed to a contract by John McCormick (1893–1961), the husband and manager of the actress Colleen Moore, who saw the young girl's potential. The name Loretta was given to her by Moore, who later explained that it was the name of her favorite doll.

Young was billed as Gretchen Young in the silent film "Sirens of the Sea" (1917). She was first billed as Loretta Young in 1928, in "The Whip Woman". That same year, she co-starred with Lon Chaney in the MGM film "Laugh, Clown, Laugh". The next year, she was named one of the WAMPAS Baby Stars.

In 1930, when she was 17, she eloped with the 26-year-old actor Grant Withers; they were married in Yuma, Arizona. The marriage was annulled the next year, just as their second movie together (ironically entitled "Too Young to Marry") was released.

In 1935, she co-starred with Clark Gable and Jack Oakie in the film version of Jack London's "The Call of the Wild", directed by William Wellman.
During World War II, Young made "Ladies Courageous" (1944; reissued as "Fury in the Sky"), the fictionalized story of the Women's Auxiliary Ferrying Squadron. It depicted a unit of female pilots who flew bomber planes from the factories to their final destinations. Young made as many as eight movies a year. In 1947, she won an Oscar for her performance in "The Farmer's Daughter". That same year, she co-starred with Cary Grant and David Niven in "The Bishop's Wife", a perennial favorite. In 1949, she received another Academy Award nomination for "Come to the Stable". In 1953, she appeared in her last theatrical film, "It Happens Every Thursday", a Universal comedy about a New York couple who move to California to take over a struggling weekly newspaper; her costar was John Forsythe.

Young hosted and starred in the well-received half-hour anthology television series "Letter to Loretta" (soon retitled "The Loretta Young Show"), which was originally broadcast from 1953 to 1961. She earned three Emmy awards for the program. Her trademark was a dramatic entrance through a living-room door in various high-fashion evening gowns. She returned at the program's conclusion to offer a brief passage from the Bible or a famous quote that reflected upon the evening's story. (Young's introductions and concluding remarks were not rerun on television because she legally stipulated that they not be, as she did not want the dresses she wore in those segments to make the program seem dated.) The program ran in prime time on NBC for eight years, the longest-running primetime network program hosted by a woman up to that time.

The program was based on the premise that each drama was in answer to a question asked in her fan mail. The title was changed to "The Loretta Young Show" during the first season (as of the episode of February 14, 1954), and the "letter" concept was dropped at the end of the second season. Towards the end of the second season, Young was hospitalized as a result of overwork, which required a number of guest hosts and guest stars; her first appearance in the 1955–56 season was for the Christmas show. From then on, Young appeared in only about half of each season's shows as an actress and served as the program's host for the remainder.

Minus Young's introductions and conclusions, the series was rerun as the "Loretta Young Theatre" in daytime by NBC from 1960 to 1964. It also appeared in syndication into the early 1970s, before being withdrawn.

In the 1962–1963 television season, Young appeared as Christine Massey, a freelance magazine writer and the mother of seven children, in "The New Loretta Young Show", on CBS. It fared poorly in the ratings on Monday evenings against ABC's "Ben Casey". It was dropped after one season of 26 episodes.

In the 1990s, selected episodes from Young's personal collection, with the opening and closing segments (and original title) intact, were released on home video, and frequently were shown on cable television. 

In 1988, she received the Women in Film Crystal Award for outstanding women, who through their endurance and the excellence of their work, helped to expand the role of women in the entertainment industry.

Young has two stars on the Hollywood Walk of Fame, one for her work in television, at 6135 Hollywood Boulevard, and the other for her work in motion pictures, at 6100 Hollywood Boulevard. In 2011, a Golden Palm Star on the Walk of Stars, in Palm Springs, California, was dedicated to her.

Young was married to the actor Grant Withers from 1930 to 1931. From September 1933 to June 1934, she had a public affair with Spencer Tracy, her co-star in "Man's Castle". She married the producer Tom Lewis in 1940; they divorced bitterly in the mid-1960s. Lewis died in 1988. They had two sons, Peter Lewis (of the San Francisco rock band Moby Grape) and Christopher Lewis, a film director. Young married the fashion designer Jean Louis in 1993. He died in 1997. Young was godmother to Marlo Thomas (daughter of the TV star Danny Thomas).

Young and Clark Gable were the romantic leads of the 1935 Twentieth Century Pictures film "The Call of the Wild", which was filmed early in that year. Young was then 22 years old, while Gable was 34 and married (to Maria "Ria" Franklin Prentiss Lucas Langham). During the filming, Gable impregnated Young.

For the next 80 years, those who knew of Gable's paternity widely assumed the pregnancy to be the result of an affair between the two. However, in 2015, Linda Lewis, Young's daughter-in-law (and Christopher Lewis's wife) stated publicly that in 1998, Young told Lewis that Gable had raped her and that though the two had flirted on set, no affair and no intimate contact had occurred save for that one incident. Young had not revealed the information before to anyone. According to Lewis, Young only stated it after having learned of the concept of date rape; she had previously always believed that a woman's job was to fend off men's amorous advances and had felt the fact that Gable had been able to force himself on her was thus a moral failing on her part.

Young, her sisters, and her mother came up with a plan to hide the pregnancy and then pass off the child as adopted. Young did not want to damage her career or Gable's, and she knew that if Twentieth Century Pictures found out about the pregnancy, they would try to pressure her to have an abortion, which Young, a devout Catholic, considered a mortal sin. When the pregnancy began to show, Young went on a "vacation" to England, and several months later returned to California. Shortly before the birth, she gave an interview from her bed, covered in blankets, stating that her long movie absence was due to a condition she had had since childhood. Young gave birth to Judith Young on November 6, 1935, in a house that her mother and she owned in Venice, California. Young named Judith after St. Jude, because he was the patron saint of (among other things) difficult situations.

Three weeks later, Young returned to moviemaking. After several months of living in the house in Venice, Judy was transferred to St. Elizabeth's, an orphanage outside Los Angeles. When she was 19 months old, her grandmother picked her up, and Young announced to gossip columnist Louella Parsons that she had adopted the infant.

Few in Hollywood were fooled by the ruse, and the child's true parentage was widely rumored in entertainment circles. Young refused to confirm or comment publicly on the rumors until 1999, when Joan Wester Anderson wrote Young's authorized biography. In interviews with Anderson for the book, Young stated that Judy was her biological child and the product of a brief affair with Gable. The child was raised as Judy Lewis, taking the last name of Young's second husband.

Judy Lewis wrote in her autobiography, "Uncommon Knowledge", that some people made fun of her because of the prominent ears she had inherited from her father. She states that at seven, she had an operation to "pin back" her large ears and that her mother always had her wear bonnets as a child. In 1958, Lewis's future husband, Joseph Tinney, told her "everybody" knew that Gable was her biological father. The only time she remembered Gable visiting her was once at her home when she was a teenager; she had no idea he was her biological father. Several years later, he appeared on "The Loretta Young Show" after Young had been in hospital for several months. Lewis was an assistant and was right behind her mother when she noticed Gable. They never had a relationship, and she never saw him again. Several years later, after becoming a mother herself, Lewis finally confronted her mother, who privately admitted the truth, stating that Judy was "a walking mortal sin."

Linda Lewis said the family stayed silent about the date-rape claim until after both Loretta Young and Judy Lewis had died.

Young was a lifelong Republican. In 1952, she appeared in radio, print, and magazine ads in support of Dwight D. Eisenhower in his campaign for President. She attended his inauguration in 1953, along with Anita Louise, Louella Parsons, Jane Russell, Dick Powell, June Allyson, and Lou Costello, among others. She was a vocal supporter of Richard Nixon and Ronald Reagan in their presidential campaigns in 1968 and 1980, respectively. Young was also an active member of the Hollywood Republican Committee, with her close friends Irene Dunne, Ginger Rogers, William Holden, George Murphy, Fred Astaire, and John Wayne.

From the time of Young's retirement in the 1960s until not long before her death, she devoted herself to volunteer work for charities and churches with her friends of many years: Jane Wyman, Irene Dunne, and Rosalind Russell. She was a member of the Good Shepherd Parish and the Catholic Motion Picture Guild in Beverly Hills, California. Young briefly came out of retirement to star in two television films, "Christmas Eve" (1986) and "Lady in the Corner" (1989). She won a Golden Globe Award for the former and was nominated again for the latter.

In 1972, a jury in Los Angeles awarded Young $550,000 in a lawsuit against NBC for breach of contract. Filed in 1966, the suit contended that NBC had allowed foreign television outlets to rerun old episodes of "The Loretta Young Show" without excluding, as agreed by the parties, the opening segment in which Young made her entrance. Young testified that her image had been damaged by portraying her in "outdated gowns." She had sought damages of $1.9 million.

Young died of ovarian cancer on August 12, 2000, at the home of her half-sister, Georgiana Montalbán (the wife of the actor Ricardo Montalban), in Santa Monica, California. She was interred in the family plot in the Holy Cross Cemetery in Culver City, California. Her ashes were buried in the grave of her mother, Gladys Belzer. Her elder sisters had both died from cancer, as did her daughter, Judy Lewis, on November 25, 2011, at the age of 76.





</doc>
<doc id="180908" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=180908" title="Luise Rainer">
Luise Rainer

Luise Rainer (; 12 January 1910 – 30 December 2014) was a German and American film actress. She was the first actor to win more than one Academy Award, and at the time of her death, the longest-lived recipient.

Rainer began acting in Germany at age 16, being trained by Austria's leading stage director, Max Reinhardt. Within a few years, she had become a distinguished Berlin stage actress with Reinhardt's Vienna theater ensemble. Critics "raved" about her acting quality. After years of acting on stage and in films in Austria and Germany, she was discovered by Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer talent scouts, who signed her to a three-year contract in Hollywood in 1935. A number of filmmakers envisioned she might become another Greta Garbo, MGM's leading female star at the time.

Her first American film role was in "Escapade" in 1935. The following year, she was given a supporting part in the musical biography "The Great Ziegfeld", where, despite limited appearances, her emotion-filled acting quality so impressed audiences that she was awarded an Oscar as Best Actress. She was later dubbed "the Viennese teardrop", for her dramatic telephone scene in the film. For her next role, producer Irving Thalberg was convinced, despite the studio's disagreement, that she would also be able to play the part of a poor, plain Chinese farm wife in "The Good Earth" (1937), based on Pearl Buck's novel about hardship in China. The subdued character role was such a dramatic contrast to her previous, vivacious character that she again won the Academy Award for Best Actress.

However, she later stated nothing worse could have happened to her than winning two consecutive Oscars, as audience expectations from then on would be too high to fulfill. After a string of unimportant movie parts, MGM and Rainer became disappointed, leading her to end her brief three-year film career, soon returning to Europe. Adding to her rapid decline, some feel, was the poor career advice given her by then husband, playwright Clifford Odets, along with the unexpected death at age 37 of her producer, Irving Thalberg, whom she greatly admired. Some film historians consider her the "most extreme case of an Oscar victim in Hollywood mythology".

The daughter of Heinrich and Emilie (née Königsberger) Rainer, known familiarly as "Heinz" (died 1956) and "Emmy" (died 1961), Rainer was born on 12 January 1910, in Düsseldorf, Germany and raised in Hamburg and later in Vienna, Austria. Some references list her birthplace as Vienna. Describing her childhood, she stated, "I was born into a world of destruction. The Vienna of my childhood was one of starvation, poverty and revolution." Her father was a businessman who settled in Europe after spending most of his childhood in Texas, where he was sent at the age of six as an orphan. (Rainer had stated that because of her father, she is an American citizen "by birth".) Rainer's family was upper-class and Jewish.
Rainer had two brothers and was a premature baby, born two months early. She describes her father as being "possessive" and "tempestuous", but whose affections and concern were centered on her. Luise seemed to him as "eternally absent-minded" and "very different". She remembers his "tyrannical possessiveness", and was saddened to see her mother, "a beautiful pianist, and a woman of warmth and intelligence and deeply in love with her husband, suffering similarly". Although generally shy at home, she was immensely athletic in school, becoming a champion runner and a fearless mountain climber. Rainer said she became an actress to help expend her physical and overly emotional energy. It was her father's wish, however, that she attend a good finishing school and "marry the right man." Rainer's rebellious nature made her appear to be more of a "tomboy" and happy to be alone. She also feared she might develop what she saw as her mother's "inferiority complex".

She was only six when she decided to become part of the entertainment world, and recalled being inspired by watching a circus act: 

I thought that a man on the wire was marvelous, in his spangles and tights. I wanted to run away and marry him but I never had an opportunity. I am sure, though, that the experience first disclosed to me the entertainment world. For years I longed to be able to walk on a tight wire, too.
At age 16, Rainer chose to follow her dream to become an actress; under the pretext of visiting her mother, she traveled to Düsseldorf for a prearranged audition at the Dumont Theater.

In the 1920s the theatre director Louise Dumont separated from her husband. Dumont was attached to a number of young actresses including Fita Benkhoff, Hanni Hoessrich and Rainer. It has been presumed that Dumont was bisexual.

Rainer later began studying acting with Max Reinhardt, and, by the time she was 18, there was already an "army of critics" who felt that she had unusual talent for a young actress. She soon became a distinguished Berlin stage actress as a member of Reinhardt's Vienna theater ensemble. Her first stage appearance was at the Dumont Theater in 1928, followed by other appearances, including Jacques Deval's play "Mademoiselle", Kingsley's "Men in White", George Bernard Shaw's "Saint Joan", "Measure for Measure", and Pirandello's "Six Characters in Search of an Author".

In 1934, after appearing in several German language films, she was seen performing in the play "Six Characters in Search of an Author" by MGM talent scout Phil Berg, who offered her a three-year contract in Hollywood. He thought she would appeal to the same audience as Swedish MGM star Greta Garbo. Initially, Rainer had no interest in films, saying in a 1935 interview: "I never wanted to film. I was only for the theater. Then I saw "A Farewell to Arms" and right away I wanted to film. It was so beautiful."

Rainer moved to Hollywood in 1935 as a hopeful new star. Biographer Charles Higham notes that MGM studio head Louis B. Mayer and story editor Samuel Marx had seen footage of Rainer before she came to Hollywood, and both felt she had the looks, charm, and especially a "certain tender vulnerability" that Mayer admired in female stars. Because of her poor command of English, Mayer assigned actress Constance Collier to train her in correct speech and dramatic modulation, and Rainer's English improved rapidly.

Her first film role in Hollywood was in "Escapade" (1935), a remake of one of her Austrian films, co-starring William Powell. She received the part after Myrna Loy gave up her role halfway through filming. After seeing the preview, Rainer ran out of the cinema displeased with how she appeared: "On the screen, I looked so big and full of face, it was awful." The film generated immense publicity for Rainer, who was hailed as "Hollywood's next sensation." However, she did not like giving interviews, explaining:
Stars are not important, only what they do as a part of their work is important. Artists need quiet in which to grow. It seems Hollywood does not like to give them this quiet. Stardom is bad because Hollywood makes too much of it, there is too much 'bowing down' before stars. Stardom is weight pressing down over the head — and one must grow upward or not at all."

Rainer's next performance was as the real-life character Anna Held in the musical biography "The Great Ziegfeld", again co-starring William Powell. Powell, impressed by Rainer's acting skill, had given her equal billing in "Escapade".

According to Higham, Irving Thalberg felt that only Rainer, of all the studio's stars, could play the part as he saw it. But Rainer recalled that studio head Mayer did not want her playing the part, seeing it as too small: "You are a star now and can't do it," he insisted. Shortly after shooting began in late 1935, doubts of Rainer's ability to pull off the role emerged in the press. She was criticized for not resembling the Polish-born stage performer. The director admitted that the main reason Rainer was cast was her eyes, claiming that they "are just as large, just as lustrous, and contain the same tantalizing quality of pseudo naughtiness" the part required.

As Thalberg expected, she successfully expressed the "coquettishness, wide-eyed charm, and vulnerability" required. Rainer "so impressed audiences with one highly emotional scene," wrote biographer Charles Affron, that she received the Academy Award for Best Actress. In one scene, for example, her character is speaking to her ex-husband Florenz Ziegfeld over the telephone, attempting to congratulate him on his new marriage: "The camera records her agitation; Ziegfeld hears a voice that hovers between false gaiety and despair; when she hangs up she dissolves into tears."

Powell, having worked with her in two films, gave his impressions of her acting style and quality: 

She is one of the most natural persons I have ever known. Moreover, she is generous, patient and possesses a magnificent sense of humor. She is an extremely sensitive organism and has a great comprehension of human nature. She has judgment and an abiding understanding which make it possible for her to portray human emotion poignantly and truly. Definitely a creative artist, she comprehends life and its significance. Everything she does has been subjected to painstaking analysis. She thinks over every shade of emotion to make it ring true. In Europe she is a great stage star. She deserves to be a star. Unmistakably she has all the qualities.
On the evening of the Academy Award ceremonies, Rainer remained at home, not expecting to win. When Mayer learned she had won, he sent MGM publicity head Howard Strickling racing to her home to get her. When she finally arrived, master of ceremonies George Jessel, during the commotion, made the mistake of introducing Rainer, which Bette Davis had been scheduled to do. She was also awarded the New York Film Critics' Award for the role.

Rainer's next film was "The Good Earth" (1937), in which she co-starred with Paul Muni; she had been picked as the most likely choice for the female lead in September 1935. The role, however, was completely the opposite of her Anna Held character, as she was required to portray a humble Chinese peasant subservient to her husband and speaking little during the entire film. Her comparative muteness, stated historian Andrew Sarris, was "an astounding tour de force after her hysterically chattering telephone scene in "The Great Ziegfeld"", and contributed to her winning her second Best Actress Oscar.

The award made her the first actress to win two consecutive Oscars, a feat not matched until Katharine Hepburn's two wins thirty years later. In later years, however, Rainer felt that winning the two Oscars so early may have been the "worst possible thing" to befall her career. She said that it made her "work all the harder now to prove the Academy was right." In any case, some critics were indignant that Greta Garbo's performance in "Camille" had been overlooked in favor of Rainer.

Rainer later recalled early conflicts even before production. Studio head Louis B. Mayer, for example, did not approve of the film being produced or her part in it, wanting her to remain a glamorous film star: "He was horrified at Irving Thalberg's insistence for me to play O-lan, the poor uncomely little Chinese peasant," she said. "I myself, with the meager dialogue given to me, feared to be a hilarious bore." Rainer remembered hearing Mayer's comments to Thalberg, her producer: "She has to be a dismal-looking slave and grow old; but Luise is a young girl; we just have made her glamorous — what are you doing?" She considered the part as one of the "greatest achievements" in her career, stating that she was allowed to express "realism," even refusing to "wear the rubber mask 'Chinese look,'" suggested by the makeup department. She was allowed to act "genuine, honest, and down-to-earth," she said.

Other serious problems took place during production. Director George W. Hill, who had spent several months in China filming backgrounds and atmospheric scenes, committed suicide soon after returning to Hollywood. The filming was postponed until Sidney Franklin could take over. A few months later, before the film was completed, Irving Thalberg died suddenly at the age of 37. Rainer commented years later, "His dying was a terrible shock to us. He was young and ever so able. Had it not been that he died, I think I may have stayed much longer in films." The film's opening screen credit includes a dedication to Thalberg: "To the Memory of Irving Grant Thalberg – his last greatest achievement – we dedicate this picture."
In late 1936, MGM conceived a script called "Maiden Voyage" especially for Rainer. The project was shelved and eventually released as "Bridal Suite" in 1939, starring Annabella as 'Luise'. Another 1936 unrealized film project that involved Rainer was "Adventure for Three", which would have co-starred William Powell. In 1938, she played Johann Strauss's long-suffering wife Poldi in the successful Oscar-winning MGM musical biopic "The Great Waltz", her last big hit.

Her four other films for MGM, "The Emperor's Candlesticks" (1937), "Big City" (1937) with Spencer Tracy, "The Toy Wife", (1938) and "Dramatic School" (1938), were ill-advised and not well received, though Rainer continued to receive praise. "The Emperor's Candlesticks", in which Rainer was cast in November 1936, reunited Rainer with Powell for the final time. For the film, she wore a red wig and wore costumes designed by Adrian, who claimed that Rainer, by the end of 1937, would become one of Hollywood's most influential people in fashion. On set, she received star treatment, having her own dressing room, diction teacher, secretary, wardrobe woman, hairdresser, and makeup artist. "The Emperor's Candlesticks" was Rainer's first film for which she received criticism, it being claimed that she did not improve in her acting technique.
Even though reviews were favourable of Rainer's performance in "Big City", reviewers agreed that she was miscast in a 'modern role' and looked "too exotic" as Tracy's wife. Despite the criticism and announcements of leaving Hollywood, Rainer renewed her contract for seven years shortly after the film's release.

Most critics agreed Rainer was "at her most appealing" in "The Toy Wife". The final MGM film Rainer made was "Dramatic School". At the time she was cast in the film, her box office popularity had declined considerably, and she was one of the many well-known stars—along with MGM colleagues Greta Garbo, Joan Crawford, and Norma Shearer, and Katharine Hepburn, Mae West, Fred Astaire, Kay Francis and others—dubbed "Box Office Poison" by the Independent Theatre Owners of America.

Rainer refused to be stereotyped or to knuckle under to the studio system, and studio head Mayer was unsympathetic to her demands for serious roles. Furthermore, she began to fight for a higher salary, and was reported as being difficult and temperamental. As a result, she missed out on several roles, including the female lead in the Edward G. Robinson gangster film "The Last Gangster" (1937), losing out to another Viennese actress, Rose Stradner. Speaking of Mayer decades later, Rainer recalled, "He said, 'We made you and we are going to destroy you.' Well, he tried his best."

Rainer made her final film appearance for MGM in 1938 and abandoned the film industry. In a 1983 interview, the actress told how she went to Louis B. Mayer's office and said to him: "Mr Mayer, I must stop making films. My source has dried up. I work from the inside out, and there is nothing inside to give." Following this altercation, she traveled to Europe, where she helped get aid to children who were victims of the Spanish Civil War. Nevertheless, she was not released from her contract and, by 1940, she was still bound to make one more film for the studio.

Disenchanted with Hollywood, where she later said it was impossible to have an intellectual conversation, she moved to New York City in 1940 to live with playwright Clifford Odets, whom she had married in 1937. Rainer had never made it a secret that she felt terrible as Odets' wife, and exclaimed in a 1938 interview: "All the acting I've done on the stage or screen has been nothing compared to the acting I did in New York, when I tried to make everyone think I was happy – and my heart was breaking." She filed for divorce in mid-1938, but proceedings were delayed "to next October" when Odets went to England. The divorce was finalized on May 14, 1940. Rainer and Odets summered at Pine Brook Country Club in Nichols, Connecticut, where numerous other members of the Group Theatre (New York) also spent the summer of 1936, both acting and writing.

Despite the negativity, Rainer was one of the actresses considered for the role of Scarlett O'Hara in "Gone With the Wind" (1939), but the idea was not well-received, and she was not given a screen test. She also was unable to persuade MGM bosses to cast her in "Johnny Belinda," based on a 1940 play about a deaf-mute rape victim.

In a later interview, Rainer commented about her disappearance from the movie industry:

I was very young. There were a lot of things I was unprepared for. I was too honest, I talked serious instead of with my eyelashes and Hollywood thought I was cuckoo. I worked in seven big pictures in three years. I have to be inspired to give a good performance. I complained to a studio executive that the source was dried up. The executive told me, 'Why worry about the source. Let the director worry about that.' I didn't run away from anybody in Hollywood. I ran away from myself.

While in Europe, Rainer studied medicine and explained she loved being accepted as "just another student", rather than as a screen actress. She returned to the stage and made her first appearance at the Palace Theatre, Manchester, on May 1, 1939, as Françoise in Jacques Deval's play "Behold the Bride"; she played the same part in her London debut at the Shaftesbury Theatre on May 23, 1939. Returning to America, she played the leading part in George Bernard Shaw's "Saint Joan" on March 10, 1940, at the Belasco Theatre in Washington, D.C. under the direction of German emigrant director Erwin Piscator. She made her first appearance on the New York stage at the Music Box Theatre in May 1942 as Miss Thing in J. M. Barrie's "A Kiss for Cinderella".

She made an appearance in "Hostages" in 1943 and abandoned film making in 1944 after marrying publisher Robert Knittel. She initially did not plan on returning to the screen, but explained her comeback in 1943 by saying: 

All the professor and the other students cared about was whether I could answer the questions, not whether I could come to class looking glamorous. But after that brief return to the stage, I began to realize that all the doors which had been opened to me in Europe, and all the work I had been able to accomplish for refugee children, was due to the fact that people knew me from my screen work. I began to feel a sense of responsibility to a job which I had started and never finished. When I also felt, after that experience at Dennis, that perhaps I did have talent after all, and that my too-sudden stardom was not just a matter of happy accident, I decided to go back.
When Rainer returned to Hollywood, her contract at MGM had long expired and she had no agent. David Rose, head of Paramount Pictures, offered her a starring role in an English film shot on location, but war conditions prevented her from accepting the role. Instead, Rose suggested in 1942 that she make a screen test for the lead role in "For Whom the Bell Tolls" (1943), but Ingrid Bergman was cast. Rainer eventually settled on a role in "Hostages" (1943) and told the press about the role: "It's certainly not an Academy Award part, and thank goodness, my bosses don't expect me to win an award with it. [..] No, this is something unspectacular but I hope, a step back in the right direction."
Rainer took her oath of allegiance to the United States in the 1940s, but she and Knittel lived in the UK and Switzerland for most of their marriage. Robert Knittel died in 1989. Luise resided in Eaton Square, London, in an apartment in the same building once inhabited by film star Vivien Leigh, also a two-time Oscar winner. The couple had one daughter, Francesca Knittel, now known as Francesca Knittel-Bowyer. Rainer had two granddaughters, Luisa and Nicole, and two great-grandchildren, Luca and Hunter.

Federico Fellini enticed her to play the cameo role of Dolores in his 1960 Oscar-winning classic "La Dolce Vita", to the point of her travelling to the Rome location, but she quit the production prior to shooting, a fact that has been attributed either to her resistance to an unwanted sex scene or to her insistence on overseeing her own dialogue. The role was later cut from the eventual screenplay. She made sporadic television and stage appearances following her and her husband's move to Britain, appearing in an episode of the World War II television series "Combat!" in 1965. She took a dual role in a 1984 episode of "The Love Boat". For the latter, she received a standing ovation from the crew. She appeared in "The Gambler" (1997) in a small role, marking her film comeback at the age of 86. She made appearances at the 1998 and 2003 Academy Awards ceremonies as part of special retrospective tributes to past Oscar winners.

On January 12, 2010, Rainer celebrated her centenary in London. Actor Sir Ian McKellen was one of her guests. During that month, she was present at the British Film Institute tribute to her at the National Film Theatre, where she was interviewed by Richard Stirling before screenings of "The Good Earth" and "The Great Waltz". She also appeared onstage at the National Theatre, where she was interviewed by Sir Christopher Frayling. In April 2010, she returned to Hollywood to present a TCM festival screening of "The Good Earth", accompanied by an interview with host Robert Osborne.
Rainer has a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame at 6300 Hollywood Boulevard.

On September 5, 2011, Rainer travelled to Berlin to receive a star on the Boulevard der Stars. Her star was among the twenty-first issued in 2011 and followed twenty that were issued in 2010. The star was issued as an exception and was not without controversy. Rainer had been forgotten when the Boulevard der Stars opened in 2010, despite being Germany's only Academy Award-winning actress. In 2011, she was initially rejected by the jury (Senta Berger, Gero Gandert, Uwe Kammann, Dieter Kosslick and Hans Helmut Prinzler) despite being nominated. A prolonged campaign started in October 2010, led by music executive Paul Baylay, who had noticed Rainer's omission on the Boulevard. Baylay campaigned in Germany, lobbying press and politicians to support the campaign to have the actress and her work recognised. The campaign was supported by the Central Council of Jews. In August 2011, the Boulevard der Stars finally relented, acknowledging the Facebook, email and letter campaign led by Baylay had been key in their decision to awarding an extra star to Rainer.

Rainer died on December 30, 2014, in London at the age of 104 from pneumonia. She was thirteen days shy of her 105th birthday.





</doc>
<doc id="177739" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=177739" title="Marie Dressler">
Marie Dressler

Marie Dressler (born Leila Marie Koerber, November 9, 1868 – July 28, 1934) was a Canadian-American stage and screen actress, comedian, and early silent film and Depression-era film star. Successful on stage in vaudeville and comic operas, she was also successful in film. In 1914, she was in the first full-length film comedy and later won the Academy Award for Best Actress in 1931.

Leaving home at the age of 14, Dressler built a career on stage in traveling theatre troupes. While not conventionally beautiful, she learned early to appreciate her talent in making people laugh. In 1892, she started a career on Broadway that lasted into the 1920s, performing comedic roles that allowed her to improvise to get laughs. From one of her successful Broadway roles, she played the titular role in the first full-length screen comedy, "Tillie's Punctured Romance" (1914), opposite Charlie Chaplin and Mabel Normand. She made several shorts, but mostly worked in New York City on stage. During World War I, along with other celebrities, she helped sell Liberty Bonds. In 1919, she helped organize the first union for stage chorus players.

Her career declined in the 1920s, and Dressler was reduced to living on her savings while sharing an apartment with a friend. In 1927, she returned to films at the age of 59 and experienced a remarkable string of successes. She won the Academy Award for Best Actress in 1930–31 for "Min and Bill" and was named the top film star for 1932 and 1933. She died of cancer in 1934.

Dressler was born Leila Marie Koerber in Cobourg, Ontario, one of two daughters born to Anna (née Henderson), a musician, and Alexander Rudolph Koerber (b. 13 April 1826, Lindow, Neu-Ruppin, Germany – d. November 1914, Wimbledon, Surrey, England), a German-born former officer in the Crimean War. Leila's elder sister, Bonita Louise Koerber (b. January 1864, Ontario, Canada – d. 18 September 1939, Richmond, Surrey, England), later married playwright Richard Ganthony.

Her father was a music teacher in Cobourg and the organist at St. Peter's Anglican Church, where as a child Marie would sing and assist in operating the organ. According to Dressler, the family regularly moved from community to community during her childhood. It has been suggested by Cobourg historian Andrew Hewson that Dressler attended a private school, but this is doubtful if Dressler's recollections of the family's genteel poverty are accurate.

The Koerber family eventually moved to the United States, where Alexander Koerber is known to have worked as a piano teacher in the late 1870s and early 1880s in Bay City and Saginaw (both in Michigan) as well as Findlay, Ohio. Her first known acting appearance was as Cupid at age five in a church theatrical performance in Lindsay, Ontario. Residents of the towns where the Koerbers lived recalled Dressler acting in many amateur productions, and Leila often aggravated her parents with those performances.

Dressler left home at 14 to begin her acting career with the Nevada Stock Company, telling the company she was actually 18. The pay was either $6 or $8 per week, and Dressler sent half to her mother. At this time, Dressler adopted the name of an aunt as her stage name. According to Dressler, her father objected to her using the name of Koerber. The identity of the aunt was never confirmed, although Dressler denied that she adopted the name from a store awning. Dressler's sister Bonita, five years older, left home at about the same time. Bonita also worked in the opera company. The Nevada Stock Company was a travelling company that played mostly in the American Midwest. Dressler described the troupe as a "wonderful school in many ways. Often a bill was changed on an hour's notice or less. Every member of the cast had to be a quick study". Dressler made her professional debut as a chorus girl named Cigarette in the play "Under Two Flags", a dramatization of life in the Foreign Legion.

Dressler remained with the troupe for three years, while her sister left to marry playwright Richard Ganthony. The company eventually ended up in a small Michigan town without money or a booking. Dressler joined the Robert Grau Opera Company, which toured the Midwest, and she received an improvement in pay to $8 per week, although Dressler claimed she never received any wages. 

Dressler ended up in Philadelphia, where she joined the Starr Opera Company as a member of the chorus. A highlight with the Starr company was portraying Katisha in "The Mikado" when the regular actress was unable to go on, due to a sprained ankle, according to Dressler. She was also known to have played the role of Princess Flametta in an 1887 production in Ann Arbor, Michigan. She left the Starr company to return home to her parents in Saginaw. According to Dressler, when the Bennett and Moulton Opera Company came to town, she was chosen from the church choir by the company's manager and asked to join the company. She remained with the company for three years, again on the road, playing roles of light opera. 

Dressler would recall specially the role of Barbara in "The Black Hussars", which she especially liked, and in which she would hit a baseball into the stands. Dressler remained with the company until 1891, gradually increasing in popularity. She moved to Chicago and was cast in productions of "Little Robinson Crusoe" and "The Tar and the Tartar". After the touring production of "The Tar and the Tartar" came to a close, she moved to New York City.

In 1892, Dressler made her debut on Broadway at the Fifth Avenue Theatre in "Waldemar, the Robber of the Rhine", which only lasted five weeks. She had hoped to become an operatic diva or tragedienne, but the writer of "Waldemar", Maurice Barrymore, convinced her to accept that her best success was in comedy roles. Years later, she appeared with his sons, Lionel and John, in motion pictures and became good friends with his daughter, actress Ethel Barrymore. In 1893, she was cast as the Duchess in "Princess Nicotine", where she met and befriended Lillian Russell. 

Dressler now made $50 per week, with which she supported her parents. She moved on into roles in "1492 Up To Date", "Girofle-Girofla", and "A Stag Party, or A Hero in Spite of Himself" After "A Stag Party" flopped, she joined the touring Camille D'Arville Company on a tour of the Midwest in "Madeleine, or The Magic Kiss", as Mary Doodle, a role giving her a chance to clown.

In 1896, Dressler landed her first starring role as Flo in George Lederer's production of "The Lady Slavey" at the Casino Theatre on Broadway, co-starring British dancer Dan Daly. It was a great success, playing for two years at the Casino. She became known for her hilarious facial expressions, seriocomic reactions, and double takes. With her large, strong body, Dressler could improvise routines where she would carry Daly to the delight of the audience. 

Her success enabled her to purchase a home for her parents on Long Island. The "Lady Slavey" success turned sour when she quit the production while it toured in Colorado. The Erlanger syndicate blocked Dressler from appearing on Broadway, and she chose to work with the Rich and Harris touring company. She returned to Broadway in "Hotel Topsy Turvy" and "The Man in the Moon".

In 1900, Dressler formed her own theatre troupe, which performed "Miss Prinnt" in cities of the northeastern U.S. The production of "Miss Prinnt" was a failure, and Dressler was forced to declare bankruptcy. 

In 1904, Dressler signed a three-year, $50,000 contract with the Weber and Fields Music Hall management, performing lead roles in "Higgeldy Piggeldy" and "Twiddle Twaddle". After her contract expired, Dressler performed vaudeville in New York, Boston, and other cities. Dressler was known for her full-figured body, and buxom contemporaries included her friends Lillian Russell, Fay Templeton, May Irwin and Trixie Friganza. Dressler herself was tall and weighed .

In 1907, she met James Henry "Jim" Dalton. The two moved to London, where she performed at the Palace Theatre of Varieties for $1500 per week. After that, she planned to mount a show herself in the West End. In 1909, with members of the Weber organization, Dressler staged a modified production of "Higgeldy Piggeldy" at the Aldwych Theatre, renaming the production "Philopoena" after Dressler's role. It was a failure, closing after one week. Dressler lost $40,000 on the production, a debt she eventually repaid in 1930. Dressler and Dalton returned to New York. Dressler declared bankruptcy for a second time.

Dressler returned to the Broadway stage in a show called "The Boy and the Girl", but it lasted only a few weeks. She moved on to perform vaudeville at Young's Pier in Atlantic City for the summer. In addition to her stage work, Dressler recorded for Edison Records in 1909 and 1910. In the fall of 1909, Dressler first entered rehearsals for a new play "Tillie's Nightmare". The play toured in Albany, Chicago, Kansas City, and Philadelphia and was a flop. Dressler helped to revise the show, without the authors' permission, and Dressler had to threaten to quit before the play opened on Broadway to keep the changes. Her revisions to the play helped make it a big success on Broadway. Biographer Betty Lee considers the play the high point of her stage career.

Dressler continued to work in the theater during the 1910s, and toured the United States during World War I, selling Liberty Bonds and entertaining the American Expeditionary Forces. American doughboys in France named both a street and a cow after Dressler. The cow was killed, leading to "Marie Dressler: Killed in Line of Duty" headlines, about which Dressler (paraphrasing Mark Twain) quipped, "I had a hard time convincing people that the report of my death had been greatly exaggerated."
After the war, Dressler returned to vaudeville in New York, and toured in Cleveland and Buffalo. She owned the rights to the play "Tillie's Nightmare", the play upon which her 1914 movie "Tillie's Punctured Romance" was based. Her husband Jim Dalton and she made plans to self-finance a revival of the play. The play fizzled in the summer of 1920, and the production was disbanded. In 1919, during the Actors' Equity strike in New York City, the Chorus Equity Association was formed and voted Dressler its first president.

Dressler accepted a role in "Cinderella on Broadway" in October 1920, but the play failed after only a few weeks. She signed on for a role in "The Passing Show of 1921", but left the cast after only a few weeks. She returned to the vaudeville stage with the Schubert Organization, travelling through the Midwest. Dalton traveled with her, although he was very ill from renal failure. He stayed in Chicago while she traveled on to St.Louis and Milwaukee. He died while Marie was in St.Louis, and Marie then left the tour. His body was claimed by his ex-wife, and he was buried in the Dalton plot.

After failing to sell a film script, Dressler took an extended trip to Europe in Fall 1922. After she returned, Dressler found it difficult to find work, considering America to be "youth-mad" and "flapper-crazy". She busied herself with visits to veteran hospitals. To save money, Dressler moved into the Ritz Hotel, arranging for a small room at a discount. In 1923, she received a small part in a revue at the Winter Garden Theatre, called "The Dancing Girl", but she was not offered any work after the show closed. In 1925, she was able to perform as part of the cast of a vaudeville show which went on a five-week tour, but still could not find any work back in New York City. In 1926, Dressler made a final appearance on Broadway as part of an Old Timers' bill at the Palace Theatre.

Early in 1930, Dressler joined Edward Everett Horton's theater troupe in Los Angeles to play a princess in Ferenc Molnár's "The Swan", but after one week, she quit the troupe. She proceeded to leave Horton flat, much to his indignation. Dressler later in 1930 played the princess-mother of Lillian Gish's character in the 1930 film adaptation of Molnar's "The Swan" called "One Romantic Night".

Dressler had appeared in two shorts as herself, but her first role in a feature film came in 1914 at the age of 44. In 1902, she had met fellow Canadian Mack Sennett and helped him get a job in the theater. After Sennett became the owner of his namesake motion picture studio, he convinced Dressler to star in his 1914 silent film "Tillie's Punctured Romance". The film was to be the first full-length, six-reel motion picture comedy. According to Sennett, a prospective budget of $200,000 meant that he needed "a star whose name and face meant something to every possible theatre-goer in the United States and the British Empire."

The movie was based on Dressler's hit "Tillie's Nightmare". She claimed to have cast Charlie Chaplin in the movie as her leading man, and was "proud to have had a part in giving him his first big chance." Instead of his recently invented Tramp character, Chaplin played a villainous rogue. Silent film comedian Mabel Normand also starred in the movie. "Tillie's Punctured Romance" was a hit with audiences, and Dressler appeared in two "Tillie" sequels and other comedies until 1918, when she returned to vaudeville.

In 1922, after her husband's death, Dressler and writers Helena Dayton and Louise Barrett tried to sell a script to the Hollywood studios, but were turned down. The one studio to hold a meeting with the group rejected the script, saying all the audiences wanted is "young love." The proposed co-star of Lionel Barrymore or George Arliss were rejected as "old fossils". In 1925, Dressler filmed a pair of two-reel short movies in Europe for producer Harry Reichenbach. The movies, titled the "Travelaffs", were not released and were considered a failure by both Dressler and Reichenbach. Dressler announced her retirement from show business.
In early 1927, Dressler received a lifeline from director Allan Dwan. Although versions differ as to how Dressler and Dwan met, including that Dressler was contemplating suicide, Dwan offered her a part in a film he was planning to make in Florida. The film, "The Joy Girl", an early color production, only provided a small part as her scenes were finished in two days, but Dressler returned to New York upbeat after her experience with the production.

Later that year, Frances Marion, a screenwriter for the Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer (MGM) studio, came to Dressler's rescue. Marion had seen Dressler in the 1925 vaudeville tour and witnessed Dressler at her professional low-point. Dressler had shown great kindness to Marion during the filming of "Tillie Wakes Up" in 1917, and in return, Marion used her influence with MGM's production chief Irving Thalberg to return Dressler to the screen. Her first MGM feature was "The Callahans and the Murphys" (1927), a rowdy silent comedy co-starring Dressler (as Ma Callahan) with another former Mack Sennett comedian, Polly Moran, written by Marion.

The film was initially a success, but the portrayal of Irish characters caused a protest in the "Irish World" newspaper, protests by the American Irish Vigilance Committee, and pickets outside the film's New York theatre. The film was first cut by MGM in an attempt to appease the Irish community, then eventually pulled from release after Cardinal Dougherty of the diocese of Philadelphia called MGM president Nicholas Schenck. It was not shown again, and the negative and prints may have been destroyed. While the film brought Dressler to Hollywood, it did not re-establish her career. Her next appearance was a minor part in the First National film "Breakfast at Sunrise". She appeared again with Moran in "Bringing Up Father", another film written by Marion. Dressler returned to MGM in 1928's "The Patsy" as the mother of the characters played by stars Marion Davies and Jane Winton.

Hollywood was converting from silent films, but "talkies" presented no problems for Dressler, whose rumbling voice could handle both sympathetic scenes and snappy comebacks (the wisecracking stage actress in "Chasing Rainbows" and the dubious matron in Rudy Vallée's"Vagabond Lover"). Frances Marion persuaded Thalberg to give Dressler the role of Marthy in the 1930 film "Anna Christie". Garbo and the critics were impressed by Dressler's acting ability, and so was MGM, which quickly signed her to a $500-per-week contract. Dressler went on to act in comedic films which were popular with movie-goers and a lucrative investment for MGM. She became Hollywood's number-one box-office attraction, and stayed on top until her death in 1934. 

She also took on serious roles. For "Min and Bill", with Wallace Beery, she won the 1930–31 Academy Award for Best Actress (the eligibility years were staggered at that time). She was nominated again for Best Actress for her 1932 starring role in "Emma", but lost to Helen Hayes. Dressler followed these successes with more hits in 1933, including the comedy "Dinner at Eight", in which she played an aging but vivacious former stage actress. Dressler had a memorable bit with Jean Harlow in the film:
Harlow: I was reading a book the other day.
Dressler: Reading a book?
Harlow: Yes, it's all about civilization or something. A nutty kind of a book. Do you know that the guy said that machinery is going to take the place of "every" profession?
Dressler: Oh my dear, "that's" something "you" need never worry about.

Following the release of "Tugboat Annie" (1933), Dressler appeared on the cover of "Time", in its August 7, 1933 issue. MGM held a huge birthday party for Dressler in 1933, broadcast live via radio. Her newly regenerated career came to an abrupt end when she was diagnosed with terminal cancer in 1934. MGM head Louis B. Mayer learned of Dressler's illness from her doctor and reportedly asked that she not be told. To keep her home, he ordered her not to travel on her vacation because he wanted to put her in a new film. Dressler was furious but complied. She appeared in more than 40 films, and achieved her greatest successes in talking pictures made during the last years of her life. The first of her two autobiographies, "The Life Story of an Ugly Duckling", was published in 1924; a second book, "My Own Story", "as told to Mildred Harrington," appeared a few months after her death.

Dressler's first marriage was to an American, George Francis Hoeppert (1862 - September 7, 1929), a theatrical manager. His surname is sometimes given as Hopper. According to Dressler's testimony, the couple married in Elizabeth, New Jersey, in 1899, although biographer Matthew Kennedy puts the marriage date as May 6, 1894. Some sources indicate Dressler had a daughter who died as a small child, but this has not been confirmed. 

Her marriage to Hoeppert gave Dressler U.S. citizenship, which was useful later in life, when immigration rules meant permits were needed to work in the United States, and Dressler had to appear before an immigration hearing. Ever since her start in the theatre, Dressler had sent a portion of her salary to her parents. Her success on Broadway meant she could afford to buy a home and later a farm on Long Island, which she shared with her parents. Dressler made several attempts to set up theatre companies or theatre productions of her own using her Broadway proceeds, but these failed and she had to declare bankruptcy several times.

In 1907, Dressler met a Maine businessman, James Henry "Jim" Dalton, who became her companion until his death [Death Record 3104-27934] on November 29, 1921, at the Congress Hotel in Chicago from diabetes. According to Dalton, the two were married in Europe in 1908. However, according to Dressler's U.S. passport application, the couple married in 1904 in France.

Dressler reportedly later learned that the "minister" who had married them in Monte Carlo was actually a local man paid by Dalton to stage a fake wedding. Dalton's first wife, Lizzie Augusta Britt Dalton, claimed he had not consented to a divorce or been served divorce papers, although Dalton claimed to have divorced her in 1905. By 1921, Dalton had become an invalid due to diabetes mellitus, and watched her from the wings in his wheelchair. After his death that year, Dressler was planning for Dalton to be buried as her husband, but Lizzie Dalton had Dalton's body returned to be buried in the Dalton family plot.

After Dalton's death, which coincided with a decline in her stage career, Dressler moved into a servant's room in the Ritz Hotel to save money. Eventually, she moved in with friend Nella Webb to save on expenses. After finding work in film again in 1927, she rented a home in Hollywood on Hillside Avenue. Although Dressler was working from 1927 on, she was still reportedly living hand to mouth. In November 1928, wealthy friends Mr. and Mrs. Arthur Neurmberg gave her $10,000, explaining they planned to give her a legacy someday, but they thought she needed the money then. In 1929, she moved to Los Angeles to 6718 Milner Road in Whitley Heights, then to 623 North Bedford Drive in Beverly Hills, both rentals. She moved to her final home at 801 North Alpine in Beverly Hills in 1932, a home which she bought from the estate of King C. Gillette. During her seven years in Hollywood, Dressler lived with her maid Mamie Cox and later Mamie's husband Jerry.

Although atypical in size for a Hollywood star, Dressler was reported in 1931 to use the services of a "body sculptor to the stars", Sylvia of Hollywood, to keep herself at a steady weight.

Biographers Betty Lee and Matthew Kennedy document Dressler's long-standing friendship with actress Claire Du Brey, whom she met in 1928. Dressler and Du Brey's falling out in 1931 was followed by a later lawsuit by Du Brey, who had been trained as a nurse, claiming back wages as the elder woman's nurse.

On Saturday, July 28, 1934, Dressler died of cancer, aged 65, in Santa Barbara, California. After a private funeral held at The Wee Kirk o’ the Heather chapel, Dressler was interred in a crypt in the Great Mausoleum in the Forest Lawn Memorial Park, Glendale, California.

Dressler left an estate worth $310,000, the bulk left to her sister Bonita.

She bestowed her 1931 automobile and $35,000 to her maid of 20 years, Mamie Steele Cox, and $15,000 to Cox's husband, Jerry R. Cox, who had served as Dressler's butler for 4 years. Dressler intended that the funds should be used to provide a place of comfort for Black travelers, and the Coxes used the funds to open the "Cocoanut Grove" night club and adjacent tourist cabins in Savannah, Georgia, in 1936, named after the night club in Los Angeles.

Dressler's birth home in Cobourg, Ontario, is known as Marie Dressler House and is open to the public. The home was converted to a restaurant in 1937 and operated as a restaurant until 1989, when it was damaged by fire. It was restored, but did not open again as a restaurant. It was the office of the Cobourg Chamber of Commerce until its conversion to its current use as a museum about Dressler and as a visitor information office for Cobourg. Each year, the Marie Dressler Foundation Vintage Film Festival is held, with screenings in Cobourg and in Port Hope, Ontario.

For her contribution to the motion picture industry, Dressler has a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame at 1731 Vine Street, added in 1960. After "Min and Bill", Dressler and Beery added their footprints to the cement forecourt of Grauman's Chinese Theatre in Hollywood, with the inscription "America's New Sweethearts, Min and Bill."

Canada Post, as part of its "Canada in Hollywood" series, issued a postage stamp on June 30, 2008, to honour Marie Dressler.

Dressler is beloved in Seattle. She played in two films based on historical Seattle characters. Tugboat Annie was based on Thea Foss of Seattle. Her character in "Politics" (1931) was based on Bertha Knight Landes, the first woman mayor of Seattle.






</doc>
<doc id="61354" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61354" title="Norma Shearer">
Norma Shearer

Edith Norma Shearer (August 11, 1902 – June 12, 1983) was a Canadian-American actress and Hollywood star from 1925 through 1942. Shearer often played spunky, sexually liberated ingenues. She appeared in adaptations of Noël Coward, Eugene O'Neill, and William Shakespeare and was the first person to be nominated five times for an Academy Award for acting, winning Best Actress for her performance in the 1930 film "The Divorcee".

Reviewing Shearer's work, Mick LaSalle called her "the exemplar of sophisticated 1930s womanhood... exploring love and sex with an honesty that would be considered frank by modern standards". As a result, Shearer is celebrated as a feminist pioneer, "the first American film actress to make it chic and acceptable to be single and not a virgin on screen". 

Shearer was of Scottish and Irish descent. Her childhood was spent in Montreal, where she was educated at Montreal High School for Girls and Westmount High School. Her life was one of privilege, due to the success of her father's construction business. However, the marriage between her parents was unhappy. Andrew Shearer was prone to manic depression and "moved like a shadow or a ghost around the house", while her mother Edith Fisher Shearer was attractive, flamboyant, and stylish. Young Norma was interested in music, as well, but after seeing a vaudeville show for her ninth birthday, announced her intention to become an actress. Edith offered support, but as Shearer entered adolescence, became secretly fearful that her daughter's physical flaws would jeopardize her chances. Shearer herself "had no illusions about the image I saw in the mirror". She acknowledged her "dumpy figure, with shoulders too broad, legs too sturdy, hands too blunt", and was also acutely aware of her small eyes that appeared crossed due to a cast in her right eye. By her own admission, though, she was "ferociously ambitious, even as a young girl" and planned to overcome her deficiencies through careful camouflage, sheer determination, and charm.

The childhood and adolescence that Shearer once described as "a pleasant dream" ended in 1918, when her father's company collapsed and older sister, Athole, suffered her first serious mental breakdown. Forced to move into a small, dreary house in a "modest" Montreal suburb, the sudden plunge into poverty only strengthened Shearer's determined attitude: "At an early age, I formed a philosophy about failure. Perhaps an endeavor, like my father's business, could fail, but that didn't mean Father had failed."

Edith Shearer thought otherwise. Within weeks, she had left her husband and moved into a cheap boarding house with her two daughters. A few months later, encouraged by her brother, who believed his niece should try her luck in "the picture business", then operating largely on the East Coast, Edith sold her daughter's piano and bought three train tickets for New York City. Also in her pocket was a letter of introduction for Norma, acquired from a local theatre owner, to Florenz Ziegfeld, who was currently preparing a new season of his famous "Ziegfeld Follies".

In January 1920, the three Shearer women arrived in New York, each of them dressed up for the occasion. "I had my hair in little curls," Shearer remembered, "and I felt very ambitious and proud." Her heart sank, however, when she saw their rented apartment: "There was one double bed, a cot with no mattress and a stove with one gas jet. The communal bathroom was at the end of a long, dimly lit hallway. Athole and I took turns sleeping with mother in the bed, but sleep was impossible anyway—the elevated trains rattled right past our window every few minutes."

The introduction to Ziegfeld proved equally disastrous. He turned Shearer down flat, reportedly calling her a "dog", and criticized her crossed eyes and stubby legs. She continued doing the rounds with her determination undimmed: "I learned that Universal Pictures was looking for eight pretty girls to serve as extras. Athole and I showed up and found 50 girls ahead of us. An assistant casting director walked up and down looking us over. He passed up the first three and picked the fourth. The fifth and sixth were unattractive, but the seventh would do, and so on, down the line until seven had been selected—and he was still some ten feet ahead of us. I did some quick thinking. I coughed loudly, and when the man looked in the direction of the cough, I stood on my tiptoes and smiled right at him. Recognizing the awkward ruse to which I'd resorted, he laughed openly and walked over to me and said, 'You win, Sis. You're Number Eight.'"

Other extra parts followed, including one in "Way Down East", directed by D. W. Griffith. Taking advantage of a break in filming and standing shrewdly near a powerful arc light, Shearer introduced herself to Griffith and began to confide her hopes for stardom. "The Master looked down at me, studied my upturned face in the glare of the arc, and shook his eagle head. Eyes no good, he said. A cast in one and far too blue; blue eyes always looked blank in close-up. You'll never make it, he declared, and turned solemnly away."

Still undeterred, Shearer risked some of her savings on a consultation with Dr. William Bates, a pioneer in the treatment of incorrectly aligned eyes and defective vision. He wrote out a series of muscle-strengthening exercises that, after many years of daily practice, would successfully conceal Shearer's cast for long periods of time on the screen. She spent hours in front of the mirror, exercising her eyes and striking poses that concealed or improved the physical flaws noted by Ziegfeld or Griffith. At night, she sat in the galleries of Broadway theatres, studying the entrances of Ina Claire, Lynn Fontanne, and Katharine Cornell.

In desperate need of money, Shearer resorted to some modeling work, which proved successful. On her modeling career, she commented: "I could smile at a cake of laundry soap as if it were dinner at the Ritz. I posed with a strand of imitation pearls. I posed in dust-cap and house dress with a famous mop, for dental paste and for soft drink, holding my mouth in a whistling pose until it all but froze that way." She became the new model for Kelly-Springfield Tires, was bestowed with the title "Miss Lotta Miles" and depicted seated inside the rim of a tire, smiling down at traffic from a large floodlit billboard.

Finally, a year after her arrival in New York, she received a break in film: fourth billing in a B-movie titled "The Stealers" (1921). In January 1923, Shearer received an offer from Louis B. Mayer Pictures, a studio in Northeast Los Angeles that was run by a small-time producer, Louis B. Mayer. Irving Thalberg had moved to Louis B. Mayer Pictures as vice president on February 15, 1923, but had already sent a telegram to Shearer's agent, inviting her to come to the studio. After three years of hardship, she found herself signing a contract. It called for $250 a week for six months, with options for renewal and a test for a leading role in a major film called "The Wanters".

Shearer left New York around February 17. Accompanied by her mother, she felt "dangerously sure of herself" as her train neared Los Angeles. When she was not welcomed, even an hour after her arrival, she realized that there would be no star treatment from her new studio. Dispirited, she allowed Edith to hail a taxi.

The next morning, Shearer went to the Mayer Company on Mission Road to meet with Thalberg. Shearer was momentarily thrown by their confused introduction, but soon found herself "impressed by his air of dispassionate strength, his calm self-possession and the almost black, impenetrable eyes set in a pale olive face".

Shearer was less impressed, however, with her first screen test: "The custom then was to use flat lighting, to throw a great deal of light from all directions, in order to kill all shadows that might be caused by wrinkles or blemishes. But the strong lights placed on either side of my face made my blue eyes look almost white, and by nearly eliminating my nose, made me seem cross-eyed. The result was hideous."

The day after the test had been screened for Mayer and Thalberg, cameraman Ernest Palmer found Shearer frantic and trembling in the hallway. Speaking with her, he was struck by her "fierce, almost raging disappointment", and after viewing the test himself, agreed that she had been "poorly handled". Under Palmer's own supervision, a second test was made and judged a success by the studio brass. The lead in "The Wanters" seemed hers, until the film's director objected, finding her "unphotogenic". Again, Shearer was to be disappointed, relegated to a minor role.
She accepted her next role in "Pleasure Mad", knowing "it was well understood that if I didn't deliver in this picture, I was through." After only a few days of shooting, things were not looking good. Shearer was struggling. Finally, the film's director complained to Mayer that he could get nothing out of the young actress, and when summoned to Mayer's office, she fully expected the axe to fall: "But to my surprise, Mr. Mayer's manner was paternal. 'There seems to be a problem,' he said, 'tell me about it.' I told him that the director had shouted at me and frightened me. Nobody had warned me that Mayer was a better actor than any of us, and I was unprepared for what happened next. He staged an alarming outburst, screaming at me, calling me a fool and a coward, accusing me of throwing away my career because I couldn't get on with a director. It worked. I became tearful, but obstinate. 'I'll show you!' I said to him. 'You'll see!' Delighted, Mayer resumed the paternal act. ‘That's what I wanted to hear,’ he said, smiling." Returning to the set, Shearer plunged into an emotional scene. "I took that scene lock, stock, and barrel, fur, fins and feathers," she remembered, earning her the respect of her director and her studio. As a reward, Thalberg cast her in six films in eight months.

The apprenticeship served Shearer well. On April 26, 1924, Louis B. Mayer Pictures was merged with Metro Pictures and the Samuel Goldwyn Company to form Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer. Shearer was cast with Lon Chaney and John Gilbert in the studio's first official production, "He Who Gets Slapped". The film was a conspicuous success and contributed to the meteoric rise of the new company, and to Shearer's visibility. By late 1925, she was carrying her own films, and was one of MGM's biggest attractions, a "bona fide" star. She signed a new contract; it paid $1,000 a week and would rise to $5,000 over the next five years. She bought a house for herself and Edith at 2004 Vine Street, which was located under the Hollywoodland sign.

Having become a star, Shearer's new challenge was to remain one. Many other talented actresses were at the studio, and she realized she would have to fight hard to stay ahead of the pack. Seeing that sensational newcomer Greta Garbo was one of a kind, she went to Thalberg and "demanded recognition as one of another kind". It was just one of the many visits she paid to his office, always to plead for better material, better parts. Thalberg would listen patiently, then invariably advise Norma to keep toeing the line, that MGM knew best, and that the movies she complained about had made her a popular actress. Occasionally, Shearer would burst into tears, but this seemed to make "no more impression than rain on a raincoat".

Privately, Thalberg was very impressed by Shearer. In a story conference, when her name was suggested to him for the part of a girl threatened with rape, Thalberg shook his head, and with a wry smile, said, "She looks too well able to take care of herself."

Shearer, for her part, found herself increasingly attracted to her boss. "Something was understood between us, an indefinite feeling that neither of us could analyze." Thalberg's appeal was not primarily sexual. What attracted Shearer was his commanding presence and steely grace, the impression he gave that wherever he sat was always the head of the table. In spite of his youth—was only 26—Thalberg became a father figure to the 23-year-old actress.

At the end of a working day in July 1925, Shearer received a phone call from Thalberg's secretary, asking if she would like to accompany Thalberg to the premiere of Chaplin's "The Gold Rush". That night, they made their first appearance as a couple. A few weeks later, Shearer went to Montreal to visit her father. While there, she had a reunion with an old school friend, who remembered: "At the end of lunch, over coffee, Norma leant in across the table. 'I'm madly in love', she whispered. 'Who with?' I asked. 'With Irving Thalberg,' she replied, smiling. I asked how Thalberg felt. 'I hope to marry him,' Norma said, and then, with the flash of the assurance I remembered so well, 'I believe I will.'"

Over the next two years, both Shearer and Irving saw other people. Louise Brooks remembered: "I held a dinner party sometime in 1926. All the place cards at the dinner table were books. In front of Thalberg's place was Dreiser's "Genius" and in front of Norma's place I put "The Difficulty of Getting Married". It was so funny because Irving walked right in and saw "Genius" and sat right down, but Norma kept walking around. She wouldn't sit down in front of "The Difficulty of Getting Married" – no way!"

By 1927, Shearer had made a total of 13 silent films for MGM. Each had been produced for under $200,000 and had, without fail, been a substantial box-office hit, often making a $200,000+ profit for the studio. She was rewarded for this consistent success by being cast in Ernst Lubitsch's "The Student Prince in Old Heidelberg", her first prestige production, with a budget over $1,000,000. While she was finishing "The Student Prince", Shearer received a call summoning her to Thalberg's office. She entered to find Thalberg sitting at his desk before a tray of diamond engagement rings. He granted her the option to choose her own ring; she picked out the biggest. After weeks of rumors, provoked by wearing the ring, it was announced in August 1927 that they were to wed. On September 29, 1927, they were married in the Hollywood wedding of the year. Shearer had two children with Thalberg, Irving Thalberg, Jr. (1930–1987) and Katherine (1935–2006). Before they were married, Shearer converted to Judaism so she could marry Thalberg.

One week after the marriage, "The Jazz Singer" was released. The first feature-length motion picture with sound, it effectively changed the cinematic landscape overnight and signaled the end of the silent motion picture era. It also spelled the end of many silent careers, and Shearer was determined hers would not be one of them. Her brother, Douglas Shearer, was instrumental in the development of sound at MGM, and every care was taken to prepare her for the microphone.

Her first talkie, "The Trial of Mary Dugan" (1929), turned out to be a tremendous success. Shearer's "medium-pitched, fluent, flexible Canadian accent, not quite American but not at all foreign" was critically applauded, and thereafter widely imitated by other actresses, nervous about succeeding in talkies. Despite the popularity of her subsequent early talking films, "The Last of Mrs. Cheyney" and "Their Own Desire" (both 1929), Shearer feared the public would soon tire of her "good girl" image, and took the advice of friend and co-star Ramón Novarro to visit an unknown photographer named George Hurrell. There, she took a series of sensual portraits which convinced her husband that she could play the lead in MGM's racy new film, "The Divorcee" (1930).

Shearer won an Academy Award for Best Actress for her role in "The Divorcee", and a series of highly successful pre-Code films followed, including "Let Us Be Gay" (1930), "Strangers May Kiss" (1931), "A Free Soul" (1931), "Private Lives" (1931), and "Strange Interlude" (1932). All of these were box-office hits, placing Shearer in competition with Joan Crawford, Greta Garbo, and Jean Harlow as MGM's top actress through the remainder of the decade.

Shearer's marriage to Thalberg gave her a degree of power in Hollywood that was resented by rivals such as Crawford, who complained that Shearer would always be offered the best roles and best conditions: "How can I compete with Norma when she's sleeping with the boss?"

Shearer's pre-Code films included period dramas and theatrical adaptations. "Smilin' Through" (1932), which co-starred Fredric March, was one of the most successful films of the period. An adaptation of Eugene O'Neill's four-hour experimental "Strange Interlude" (1932), which also starred Clark Gable, was a disappointing adaptation of O'Neill, but a showcase for Shearer, thus a major hit.

The enforcement of the Production Code in 1934 forced Shearer to drop her celebrated "free soul" image and move exclusively into period dramas and "prestige" pictures. Of these, "The Barretts of Wimpole Street" (1934) proved her most successful at the box office, making a profit of $668,000, in part because the film contained elements that slipped by the newly instituted Production Code. In that film, she played a role made famous by Katharine Cornell. Shearer also took on another play popularized by Cornell in "Romeo and Juliet" (1936) (her first film of the '30s to lose money) and "Marie Antoinette" (1938) (a budget of almost $2,500,000 was too great for the studio to expect a profit), though their elaborate sets and costumes helped make the films immensely popular with audiences.

Shearer was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Actress on six occasions, winning only for "The Divorcee" in 1930. She was nominated the same year for "Their Own Desire", for "A Free Soul" in 1931, "The Barretts of Wimpole Street" in 1934, "Romeo and Juliet" in 1936, and "Marie Antoinette" in 1938. Marion Davies later recalled that Shearer came to a party at San Simeon in her Marie Antoinette costume; Davies said she was not about to remove the door so Shearer could enter, so Norma made her grand entrance through wider doors leading from another room. Four chairs were arranged so she could sit at the table in her voluminous skirts.
In 1939, she attempted an unusual role in the dark comedy "Idiot's Delight", adapted from the 1936 Robert E. Sherwood play. It was the last of Shearer's three films with Clark Gable, after "A Free Soul" (1931) and "Strange Interlude" (1932). "The Women" (1939) followed, with an entirely female cast of more than 130 speaking roles.

Shearer was also one of the many actresses considered for the role of Scarlett O'Hara in "Gone With The Wind" (1939). However, she expressed no interest, joking, "Scarlett is a thankless role. The one I'd really like to play is Rhett!".

Critics praised the suspenseful atmosphere in her next film, "Escape" (1940), where she played the lover of a Nazi general who helps an American free his mother from a concentration camp. With increasing interest in the war in Europe, the film performed well at the box office, but Shearer made errors in judgment, passing up roles in the highly successful films "Now, Voyager" and "Mrs. Miniver", to star in "We Were Dancing" and "Her Cardboard Lover" (1942), which both failed at the box office. In 1942, Shearer unofficially retired from acting.

After Thalberg's unexpected death on September 14, 1936, Shearer retained a lawyer to ensure that Thalberg's percentages of films on which he had worked were still paid to his estate, which was contested by MGM. When she took the story to gossip columnist Louella Parsons, the studio was forced to give in and granted all the profits from MGM movies made and released from 1924 to 1938, meaning the estate eventually received over $1.5 million in percentage payments. Nevertheless, Shearer's contract was renewed for six films at $150,000 each. During this time, she embarked on a brief romance with the younger actor James Stewart, and then with the married actor George Raft (Raft had separated from his wife years earlier, soon after they married). He stated publicly that he wanted to marry Shearer. However, his wife's refusal to allow a divorce and the disapproval of MGM studio head Louis B. Mayer caused Shearer to end the affair.

Following her retirement in 1942, she married Martin Arrougé (March 23, 1914 – August 8, 1999), a former ski instructor 11 years her junior. Although often attending public events in her later life, Shearer gradually withdrew from the Hollywood social scene. In 1960, her secretary stated: "Miss Shearer does not want any publicity. She doesn't talk to anyone. But I can tell you that she has refused many requests to appear in motion pictures and TV shows." Arrougé and Shearer remained married until her death.

On June 12, 1983, Shearer died of bronchial pneumonia at the Motion Picture Country Home in Woodland Hills, California, where she had been living since 1980.

She is entombed in the Great Mausoleum at Forest Lawn Memorial Park in Glendale, California, in a crypt marked Norma Arrouge, along with her first husband, Irving Thalberg.

Shearer's fame declined after her retirement in 1942. She was rediscovered in the late 1950s, when her films were sold to television, and in the 1970s, when her films enjoyed theatrical revivals. By the time of her death in 1983, she was best known for her "noble" roles in "Marie Antoinette" and "The Women".

A Shearer revival began in 1988, when Turner Network Television began broadcasting the entire Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer film library. In 1994, Turner Classic Movies began showcasing her films, most of which had not been seen since the reconstitution of the Production Code in 1934. Shearer's work was seen anew, and the critical focus shifted from her "noble" roles to her pre-Code roles.

Shearer's work gained more attention in the 1990s through the publication of a series of books. The first was a biography by Gavin Lambert. Next came "Complicated Women: Sex and Power in Pre-Code Hollywood" by Mick LaSalle, film critic at the "San Francisco Chronicle". Mark A. Vieira published three books on subjects closely related to Shearer: a biography of her husband, producer Irving Thalberg; and two biographies of photographer George Hurrell. Shearer was noted not only for the control she exercised over her work, but also for her patronage of Hurrell and Adrian, and for discovering actress Janet Leigh and actor-producer Robert Evans.

For her contribution to the motion picture industry, Shearer has a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame at 6636 Hollywood Boulevard.

On June 30, 2008, Canada Post issued a postage stamp in its "Canadians in Hollywood" series to honour Norma Shearer, along with others for Raymond Burr, Marie Dressler, and Chief Dan George.

Shearer and Thalberg are reportedly the models for Stella and Miles, the hosts of the Hollywood party in the short story "Crazy Sunday" (1932) by F. Scott Fitzgerald.

Most of Shearer's MGM films are broadcast on Turner Classic Movies, and many of them are also available on DVD from Warner Home Video. In 2008, she was inducted into Canada's Walk of Fame. In 2015, a number of Shearer films became available in high-definition format, authored by Warner Home Video in most cases from the nitrate camera negatives: "A Free Soul", "Romeo and Juliet", "Marie Antoinette", and "The Women".

Shearer was the first person to receive five Academy Award nominations for acting. She and brother Douglas Shearer are the first Oscar-winning siblings.

Notes
Bibliography



</doc>
<doc id="210214" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=210214" title="Patricia Neal">
Patricia Neal

Patsy Louise "Patricia" Neal (January 20, 1926 – August 8, 2010) was an American actress of stage and screen. She was best known for her film roles as World War II widow Helen Benson in "The Day the Earth Stood Still" (1951), wealthy matron Emily Eustace Failenson in "Breakfast at Tiffany's" (1961), and the worn-out housekeeper Alma Brown in "Hud" (1963), for which she won the Academy Award for Best Actress. She featured as the matriarch in the television film "The Homecoming: A Christmas Story" (1971); her role as Olivia Walton was recast for the series it inspired, "The Waltons".

Patsy Louise Neal was born in Packard, Whitley County, Kentucky, to William Burdette Neal (1895–1944) and Eura Mildred (née Petrey) Neal (1899–2003). She had two siblings. 

She grew up in Knoxville, Tennessee, where she attended Knoxville High School, and studied drama at Northwestern University. At Northwestern, she was crowned Syllabus Queen in a campus-wide beauty pageant.

Neal gained her first job in New York as an understudy in the Broadway production of the John Van Druten play "The Voice of the Turtle". Next she appeared in Lillian Hellman's "Another Part of the Forest" (1946), winning the 1947 Tony Award for Best Featured Actress in a Play, in the first presentation of the Tony awards.

Neal made her film debut with Ronald Reagan in "John Loves Mary", followed by another role with Reagan in "The Hasty Heart", and then "The Fountainhead" (all 1949). The shooting of the last film coincided with her affair with her married co-star, Gary Cooper, with whom she worked again in "Bright Leaf" (1950).

Neal starred with John Garfield in "The Breaking Point" (1950), in "The Day the Earth Stood Still" (1951) with Michael Rennie and in "Operation Pacific" (also 1951) starring John Wayne. She suffered a nervous breakdown around this time, following the end of her relationship with Cooper, and left Hollywood for New York, returning to Broadway in 1952 for a revival of "The Children's Hour". In 1955, she starred in Edith Sommer's "A Roomful of Roses", staged by Guthrie McClintic.

While in New York, Neal became a member of the Actors Studio. Based on connections with other members, she subsequently co-starred in the film "A Face in the Crowd" (1957, directed by Elia Kazan), the play "The Miracle Worker" (1959, directed by Arthur Penn), the film "Breakfast at Tiffany's" (1961, co-starring George Peppard), and the film "Hud" (1963), directed by Martin Ritt and starring Paul Newman. During the same period, she appeared on television in an episode of "The Play of the Week" (1960), featuring an Actors Studio-dominated cast in a double bill of plays by August Strindberg, and in a British production of Clifford Odets' "Clash by Night" (1959), which co-starred one of the first generation of Actors Studio members, Nehemiah Persoff.
Neal won the Academy Award for Best Actress for her performance in "Hud" (1963), co-starring with Paul Newman. When the film was initially released it was predicted she would be a nominee in the supporting actress category, but when she began collecting awards, they were always for Best Actress, from the New York Film Critics, the National Board of Review and a BAFTA award from the British Academy of Film and Television Arts.

Neal was reunited with John Wayne in Otto Preminger's "In Harm's Way" (1965), winning her second BAFTA Award. Her next film was "The Subject Was Roses" (1968), for which she was nominated for an Academy Award. She starred as the matriarch in the television film"The Homecoming: A Christmas Story" (1971), which inspired the television series "The Waltons"; she won a Golden Globe for her performance. In a 1999 interview with the Archive of American Television, "Waltons" creator Earl Hamner said he and producers were unsure if Neal's health would allow her to commit to the schedule of a weekly television series, so instead they cast Michael Learned in the role of Olivia Walton. Neal played a dying widowed mother trying to find a home for her three children in an episode of NBC's "Little House on the Prairie" broadcast in 1975.

Neal played the title role in Robert Altman's movie "Cookie's Fortune" (1999). She worked on Silvana Vienne's movie "Beyond Baklava: The Fairy Tale Story of Sylvia's Baklava" (2007), appearing as herself in the portions of the documentary talking about alternative ways to end violence in the world. In the same year as the film's release, Neal received one of two annually-presented Lifetime Achievement Awards at the SunDeis Film Festival in Waltham, Massachusetts. (Academy Award nominee Roy Scheider was the recipient of the other.)

Having won a Tony Award in their inaugural year (1947) and eventually becoming the last surviving winner from that first ceremony, Neal often appeared as a presenter in later years. Her original Tony was lost, so she was given a surprise replacement by Bill Irwin when they were about to present the 2006 Tony Award for Best Performance by a Leading Actress in a Play to Cynthia Nixon. In April 2009, Neal received a lifetime achievement award from WorldFest Houston on the occasion of the debut of her film, "Flying By". Neal was a long-term actress with Philip Langner's Theatre at Sea/Sail With the Stars productions with the Theatre Guild. In her final years she appeared in a number of health-care videos.

Neal was inducted into the American Theatre Hall of Fame in 2003. She was a subject of the British television show "This Is Your Life" in 1978 when she was surprised by Eamonn Andrews at a cocktail party on London's Park Lane. 

During the filming of "The Fountainhead" (1949), Neal began an affair with her married co-star, Gary Cooper, whom she had met in 1947 when she was 21 and he was 46. At one point in their relationship, Cooper hit Neal in the face after he caught Kirk Douglas trying to seduce her. Cooper persuaded Neal to have an abortion when she became pregnant with his child. A few months later, Neal hoped that tempers would cool while she went to London, England, to film "The Hasty Heart", starring Ronald Reagan. Reagan was unhappy over his breakup with Jane Wyman, adding to what would be a depressing shoot for Neal.
Neal met British writer Roald Dahl at a dinner party hosted by Lillian Hellman in 1951. They married on July 2, 1953, at Trinity Church in New York. The marriage produced five children: Olivia Twenty (April 20, 1955 – November 17, 1962); Chantal Sophia "Tessa" (b. 1957); Theo Matthew (b. 1960); Ophelia Magdalena (b. 1964); and Lucy Neal (b. 1965). Her granddaughters include author, television presenter and model Sophie Dahl, and fashion designer Phoebe Dahl.

In the early 1960s, the couple suffered through grievous injury to one child and the death of another. On December 5, 1960, their son Theo, four months old, suffered brain damage when his baby carriage was struck by a taxicab in New York City. In May 1961, the family returned to Gipsy House in Great Missenden, Buckinghamshire, where Theo continued his rehabilitation. Neal would later describe the two years of family life during Theo's recovery as one of the most beautiful periods of her life. However, on November 17, 1962, their daughter Olivia died at age 7 from measles encephalitis.

While pregnant in 1965, Neal suffered three burst cerebral aneurysms and was in a coma for three weeks. One newspaper ran an obituary, but she survived with the assistance of Dahl and a number of volunteers, who developed a gruelling style of therapy that fundamentally changed the way stroke patients were treated. She subsequently relearned to walk and talk ("I think I'm just stubborn, that's all") and on August 4, 1965, she gave birth to a healthy daughter, Lucy. By 1968 her recovery was so apparently complete that her performance in "The Subject Was Roses" led to an Oscar nomination the following year.

Neal's and Dahl's marriage ended in divorce in 1983. In 1981, Glenda Jackson played her in a television movie, "The Patricia Neal Story" which co-starred Dirk Bogarde as Neal's husband Dahl. Neal's autobiography, "As I Am", was published in 1988. In the final year of her life Neal became a Catholic.

In 1978, Fort Sanders Regional Medical Center in Knoxville dedicated the Patricia Neal Rehabilitation Center in her honor. The center provides intense treatment for stroke, spinal cord, and brain injury patients. It serves as part of Neal's advocacy for paralysis victims. She regularly visited the center in Knoxville, providing encouragement to its patients and staff. Neal appeared as the center's spokeswoman in advertisements until her death.

Neal died at her home in Edgartown, Martha's Vineyard, Massachusetts, on August 8, 2010, from lung cancer. She was 84 years old. 

She had become a Catholic four months before she died and was buried in the Abbey of Regina Laudis in Bethlehem, Connecticut, where the actress Dolores Hart, her friend since the early 1960s, had become a nun and ultimately prioress. Neal had been a longtime supporter of the abbey's open-air theatre and arts program.





</doc>
<doc id="62032" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62032" title="Simone Signoret">
Simone Signoret

Simone Signoret (; 25 March 192130 September 1985) was a French cinema actress often hailed as one of France's greatest film stars. She became the first French person to win an Academy Award, for her role in "Room at the Top" (1959).

In her lifetime she also received two Césars, three BAFTAs, an Emmy, a Cannes Film Festival Award, the Silver Bear for Best Actress awards, an NBR Award and a Golden Globe nomination.

Signoret was born Simone Henriette Charlotte Kaminker in Wiesbaden, Germany, to André and Georgette (Signoret) Kaminker, as the eldest of three children, with two younger brothers. Her father, a pioneering interpreter who worked in the League of Nations, was a French-born army officer from a Polish Jewish family, who brought the family to Neuilly-sur-Seine on the outskirts of Paris. Her mother, Georgette, from whom she acquired her stage name, was a French Catholic.

Signoret grew up in Paris in an intellectual atmosphere and studied English, German and Latin. After completing secondary school during the Nazi occupation, Simone was responsible for supporting her family and forced to take work as a typist for a French collaborationist newspaper, "Les nouveaux temps", run by Jean Luchaire.

During the German occupation of France, Signoret mixed with an artistic group of writers and actors who met at the Café de Flore in the Saint-Germain-des-Prés quarter. By this time, she had developed an interest in acting and was encouraged by her friends, including her lover, Daniel Gélin, to follow her ambition. In 1942, she began appearing in bit parts and was able to earn enough money to support her mother and two brothers as her father, who was a French patriot, had fled the country in 1940 to join General De Gaulle in England. She took her mother's maiden name for the screen to help hide her Jewish roots.

Signoret's sensual features and earthy nature led to type-casting and she was often seen in roles as a prostitute. She won considerable attention in "La Ronde" (1950), a film which was banned briefly in New York as immoral. She won further acclaim, including an acting award from the British Film Academy, for her portrayal of another prostitute in Jacques Becker's "Casque d'or" (1951). She appeared in many notable films in France during the 1950s, including "Thérèse Raquin" (1953), directed by Marcel Carné, "Les Diaboliques" (1954), and "The Crucible" ("Les Sorcières de Salem"; 1956), based on Arthur Miller's "The Crucible".
In 1958, Signoret acted in the English independent film, "Room at the Top" (1959), which won her numerous awards including the Best Female Performance Prize at Cannes and the Academy Award for Best Actress. She was the only French cinema actress to receive an Oscar until Juliette Binoche in 1997 (Supporting Actress) and Marion Cotillard in 2008 (Best Actress), and the first woman to win the award appearing in a foreign film. She was offered films in Hollywood, but turned them down, continuing to work in France and England—notably opposite Laurence Olivier in "Term of Trial" (1962)—until 1965. Earning another Oscar nomination for her work on what would be Vivien Leigh's final film—Columbia Pictures' "Ship of Fools", also starring Lee Marvin—Signoret appeared in a few other Hollywood films before returning to France in 1969.

In 1962, Signoret translated Lillian Hellman's play "The Little Foxes" into French for a production in Paris that ran for six months at the Theatre Sarah-Bernhardt. She played the Regina role as well. Hellman was displeased with the production, although the translation was approved by scholars selected by Hellman.

Signoret's one attempt at Shakespeare, performing Lady Macbeth opposite Alec Guinness at the Royal Court Theatre in London in 1966 proved to be ill-advised, with some harsh critics; one referred to her English as "impossibly Gallic".

Signoret's overall appearance aged noticeably in early middle-age and she was often criticized for gaining weight and letting her looks go, but she was never concerned with glamour, ignored the insults and continued giving finely etched performances. She won more acclaim for her portrayal of a weary madam in "Madame Rosa" (1977) and as an unmarried sister who unknowingly falls in love with her paralyzed brother via anonymous correspondence in "" (1980).

Signoret's memoirs, "Nostalgia Isn't What It Used To Be", were published in 1978. She also wrote a novel, "Adieu Volodya", published in 1985, the year of her death.

Signoret first married filmmaker Yves Allégret (1944–49), with whom she had a daughter Catherine Allégret, herself an actress. Her second marriage was to the Italian-born French actor Yves Montand in 1951, a union which lasted until her death.

Signoret died of pancreatic cancer in Autheuil-Authouillet, France, aged 64. She was buried in Père Lachaise Cemetery in Paris and Yves Montand was later buried next to her.

Emmy Awards





</doc>
<doc id="67763" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67763" title="Jessica Lange">
Jessica Lange

Jessica Phyllis Lange (; born April 20, 1949) is an American actress who has received worldwide acclaim for her work in film, theater, and television. The recipient of several awards, including two Academy Awards, one Tony Award, three Emmy Awards, five Golden Globe Awards, one Screen Actors Guild Award, and three Dorian Awards; in 1998, "Entertainment Weekly" listed Lange among the 25 Greatest Actresses of the 1990s. In 2016, Lange became the twenty-second thespian in history to achieve the Triple Crown of Acting.

Lange was discovered by producer Dino De Laurentiis while modeling part-time for the Wilhelmina modelling agency. She made her professional film debut in his 1976 remake of the 1933 action-adventure classic "King Kong", for which she won her first Golden Globe Award. In 1982, she became the first performer in 40 years to receive two Oscar nominations within the same year; she won her second Golden Globe Award and the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress for her role as a soap opera star in "Tootsie", and was also nominated for the Academy Award for Best Actress for her portrayal of the troubled actress Frances Farmer, in "Frances". Lange received three more nominations for "Country" (1984), "Sweet Dreams" (1985) and "Music Box" (1989), before winning her third Golden Globe Award, and the Academy Award for Best Actress for her performance as a manic depressive housewife in "Blue Sky" (1994). In 1995, Lange became the second actress in Oscar history to win Best Actress after winning Best Supporting Actress; an achievement that was not repeated until nearly 20 years later.

In 2010, she won her first Primetime Emmy Award for her portrayal of Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis' famed aunt, Big Edie, in HBO's "Grey Gardens" (2009). Between 2011 and 2014, she won her first Screen Actors Guild Award, fifth Golden Globe Award, and second and third Emmy Awards for her performances in the and of FX's horror anthology series "American Horror Story" (2011–2015). In 2016, Lange won her first Tony Award for Best Performance by a Leading Actress in a Play, an Outer Critics Circle Award for Best Lead Actress in a Play and a Drama Desk Award for Outstanding Actress in a Play for her critically acclaimed performance in the Broadway revival of "Long Day's Journey into Night". In 2017, Lange portrayed Joan Crawford in the critically acclaimed mini-series "" receiving rave reviews, with many critics hailing her portrayal as the best performance of her career. 

In addition to acting, Lange is a photographer with three published works. She has also been a foster parent and currently holds a Goodwill Ambassador position for UNICEF, specializing in HIV/AIDS in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and in Russia.

Lange was born in Cloquet, Minnesota, on April 20, 1949. Her father, Albert John Lange (1913–1989), was a teacher and traveling salesman, and her mother, Dorothy Florence (née Sahlman; 1913–1998), was a housewife. She has two older sisters, Ann and Jane, and a younger brother, George. Her paternal ancestry originates in Germany and the Netherlands, while her maternal ancestry originates in Finland. Due to the nature of her father's professions, her early home life was chaotic. Her family moved over a dozen times to various towns and cities in Minnesota before settling back down in her hometown, where she graduated from Cloquet High School.

In 1967, she received a scholarship to study art and photography at the University of Minnesota, where she met and began dating Spanish photographer Paco Grande. After the two married in 1971, Lange left college to pursue a more bohemian lifestyle, opting to travel throughout the United States and Mexico in a minivan with Grande. The couple then moved to Paris, where they drifted apart. While in Paris, Lange studied mime theatre under the supervision of Étienne Decroux, and joined the Opéra-Comique as a dancer.

While sharing an apartment with Jerry Hall and Grace Jones, she was discovered by fashion illustrator Antonio Lopez and subsequently became a model for the Wilhelmina modelling agency. In 1973, she returned to the States and began work in New York City as a waitress at the Lion's Head Tavern in Greenwich Village. While modelling, Lange was discovered by Hollywood producer Dino De Laurentiis, who was looking to cast his next leading lady, an ingenue for his remake of the 1933 "King Kong". Lange made her film debut in the 1976 "King Kong", beating actresses Meryl Streep and Goldie Hawn for the role of "damsel-in-distress". Despite being a box-office success – it became the fifth-highest-grossing film of 1976 – and receiving an Academy Award nomination for Best Special Effects, the film and her performance were widely panned. However, renowned film critic Pauline Kael praised her, noting, "The movie is sparked by Jessica Lange's fast yet dreamy comic style. [She] has the high, wide forehead and clear-eyed transparency of Carole Lombard in "My Man Godfrey", [and] one liners so dumb that the audience laughs and moans at the same time, yet they're in character, and when Lange says them she holds the eye and you like her, the way people liked Lombard." Lange went on to win the 1976 Golden Globe Award for New Star of the Year. She would remain a favorite of Kael's, who would later comment, "She has a facial structure that the camera yearns for, and she has talent, too."

At the close of the decade, Bob Fosse, whom Lange had befriended and with whom she had carried a casual romantic affair, cast Lange as the Angel of Death, a part that he had written specifically for her in his semiautobiographical film, "All That Jazz" (1979). She had also been considered for the role of Wendy Torrance in "The Shining" before that role ultimately went to Shelley Duvall.

Lange began the new decade in the light romp "How to Beat the High Cost of Living" (1980), co-starring Jane Curtin and Susan Saint James, but it received mostly negative reviews and quickly disappeared from theaters. A year later, she was contacted by director Bob Rafelson regarding a project on which he was working with Jack Nicholson, who had recently auditioned Lange for "Goin' South" (1978). Rafelson paid Lange a visit in upstate New York, where she was doing summer stock theater, and has famously recounted how he watched the budding actress conversing on the telephone for half an hour before their meeting when he decided that he had found the lead for his film. After his meeting with Lange, he wrote her name down on a piece of paper, placed it in an envelope, and sealed it. After several meetings and auditions with other actresses (though Rafelson had already made his decision, he feared he had done so too quickly and wanted to make sure his choice was absolutely right), the final choice was between Lange and Meryl Streep. In the end, Rafelson offered Lange the lead role opposite Nicholson in his remake of the classic "film noir", "The Postman Always Rings Twice" (1981). Upon offering her the part, he gave her the sealed envelope in which he had placed the piece of paper with her name on it. Although the controversial film received mixed reviews, Lange was widely praised for her performance.

While editing "The Postman Always Rings Twice", Graeme Clifford realized he had found the leading lady for his next film – his first as a director; a biographical film of actress Frances Farmer, whose disillusionment with Hollywood and chaotic family background led her down a tragic path. Filming "Frances" (1982), which co-starred Kim Stanley and Sam Shepard, was a grueling experience for Lange, who pored over the screenplay scene by scene, making deep and often taxing connections between her life and Farmer's to tap into the well of emotions the role required. By the end of the shoot, she was physically and mentally spent. Due to this, she decided to take her co-star Stanley's advice to star in "something light", which led her to accept a supporting role opposite Dustin Hoffman in Sydney Pollack's "Tootsie" (1982).

In 1982, Lange became the first performer in 40 years to receive two Academy Award nominations in the same year, scoring a nomination for her work in "Frances" and eventually winning the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress for her work in "Tootsie", which not only became the second-highest-grossing film of 1982, following Steven Spielberg's "E.T.", but which also scored an additional nine Oscar nominations, including one for Best Picture. Her performance in the film also earned her a Golden Globe, along with awards from the National Society of Film Critics, the New York Film Critics Circle, the Boston Society of Film Critics, and the Kansas City Film Critics Circle. Lange also won Best Actress at the Moscow International Film Festival for her performance in "Frances".

Lange next produced and starred, again opposite Shepard, in 1984's "Country", a topical film depicting a family during the farm crisis. Her performance earned her Academy Award and Golden Globe nominations for Best Actress. That same year, she made her television debut as Maggie the Cat, starring opposite Tommy Lee Jones in a CBS "Playhouse" production of Tennessee Williams's "Cat on a Hot Tin Roof". The following year, she testified before the United States Congress on behalf of the Democratic House Task Force on Agriculture, alongside Jane Fonda and Sissy Spacek, whom she later neighbored and befriended.

At the close of 1985, she portrayed legendary country singer Patsy Cline in Karel Reisz's biopic, "Sweet Dreams", opposite Ed Harris, Ann Wedgeworth, and John Goodman. She was nominated a fourth time for an Oscar and came in second place for both the National Board of Review Award for Best Actress and the National Society of Film Critics Award for Best Actress. In several interviews, Meryl Streep has stated that she "begged" Reisz, who directed her in 1981's "The French Lieutenant's Woman", for the role of Cline, but that his first choice had always been Lange. Streep has also been quite vocal and adamant in her praise for Lange's performance, calling her "beyond wonderful" in the film and stating, "I couldn't imagine doing it as well or even coming close to what Jessica did because she was so amazing in it."

Lange's films throughout the mid- to late 1980s, which included "Crimes of the Heart" (1986), "Far North" (1988), and "Everybody's All-American" (1989), were mostly low profile and underperformed at the box office, though she was often singled out and praised for her work. In 1989, she starred in Costa-Gavras' "Music Box" Lange played a Hungarian lawyer defending her father of Nazi war crimes. Her performance earned her a fifth Academy Award nomination and a sixth Golden Globe nomination for Best Actress.

Lange continued making films throughout the 1990s, periodically taking time off to raise her children and also choosing theater- and television-based projects. She began the decade in Paul Brickman's warmly received "Men Don't Leave" (1990), for which she earned positive reviews and came in third place for the National Society of Film Critics Award for Best Actress. She was then approached by Martin Scorsese and Robert De Niro, who had both auditioned her for the role of Jake LaMotta's wife in "Raging Bull" (1981), to star in a remake of "Cape Fear" (1991). The film became the 12th-highest-grossing film of the year. In 1992, Lange starred in a television adaptation of Willa Cather's "O Pioneers!", receiving her seventh Golden Globe nomination for Best Actress. Her Broadway debut, which was met by mixed reviews, also occurred that same year when she portrayed Blanche DuBois in a production of Tennessee Williams' "A Streetcar Named Desire", opposite Alec Baldwin.

In 1994, Lange was lauded for her performance as a manic depressive army wife in the 1960s in Tony Richardson's final film, "Blue Sky". In 1995, she won the Academy Award for Best Actress, along with the Golden Globe Award for Best Actress, the Los Angeles Film Critics Association Award for Best Actress, the Utah Film Critics Association Award for Best Actress, and the Sant Jordi Award for Best Actress. She also came in second place for the National Board of Review Award for Best Actress, the National Society of Film Critics Award for Best Actress, and the Chicago Film Critics Association Award for Best Actress.

In 1995, she followed her victory with further critically lauded performances in "Losing Isaiah", opposite Halle Berry, and "Rob Roy", with Liam Neeson. That same year, Lange reprised her role as Blanche DuBois in a CBS television adaptation of "A Streetcar Named Desire", opposite Alec Baldwin, Diane Lane, and John Goodman. She received glowing reviews for her performance, which earned her fourth Golden Globe Award and her first Primetime Emmy Award nomination for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Miniseries or a Movie.

In 1996, Lange made her London stage debut in another performance as Blanche DuBois, which received rave reviews. The following year, she starred opposite Michelle Pfeiffer in a film adaptation of Jane Smiley's Pulitzer Prize-winning novel, "A Thousand Acres". Lange received her ninth Golden Globe Award nomination and won the Venice Film Festival's Schermi d'Amore award for her performance in the film. In 1998, she starred opposite Elisabeth Shue in a film adaptation of Balzac's "Cousin Bette", for which she received strong reviews. That same year, Lange also starred opposite Gwyneth Paltrow in the somewhat cult classic, "Hush", which generally received negative reviews. Roger Ebert, however, praised Lange's performance, commenting, "The film's most intriguing element is the performance by Jessica Lange, who by not going over the top provides Martha with a little pathos to leaven the psychopathology."

Lange received strong reviews for her performance in "Titus", Julie Taymor's 1999 adaptation of William Shakespeare's "Titus Andronicus", co-starring Anthony Hopkins and Alan Cumming. Film critic for "Entertainment Weekly", Lisa Schwarzbaum, included Lange in a "for your consideration" article directed at the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences. She commented, "Jessica Lange already has two Oscars and six nominations to her credit, so her appearance near the words 'Academy Awards' should never be a surprise. But everything about her daring performance in "Titus" as Tamora, the Queen of the Goths, is an astonishment. Donning breastplates, vowing vengeance, tearing into Shakespeare for the first time as if nothing could be more fun, Lange steals the show — and when the star of the show is Anthony Hopkins, that's grand theft."

Lange began the new millennium with a London stage production of Eugene O'Neill's "Long Day's Journey into Night", playing the part of the "morphine"-addicted Mary Tyrone, for which she became the first American actress to receive an Olivier Award nomination.

She appeared mostly in supporting roles thereafter, most notably opposite Christina Ricci in the 2001 adaptation of Elizabeth Wurtzel's best-selling memoir on depression, "Prozac Nation". In 2003, Lange starred opposite Tom Wilkinson in HBO's "Normal", a film about a man who reveals to his wife his decision to have a sex change, for which she received nominations for the Emmy and Golden Globe Awards for Best Actress in a Miniseries or Movie. She followed this with performances in the Bob Dylan vehicle, "Masked and Anonymous" (2003), Tim Burton's "Big Fish" (2003), Jim Jarmusch's "Broken Flowers" (2005) and Wim Wenders' "Don't Come Knocking" (2005), before starring in a Broadway revival of Tennessee Williams' "The Glass Menagerie" for which she received generally mixed reviews. She later starred with Tammy Blanchard in a remake of "Sybil" in 2007.

In 2009, Lange co-starred as Big Edie, opposite Drew Barrymore, in HBO's "Grey Gardens", directed by Michael Sucsy and based on the 1975 documentary of the same name. The film was a huge success, garnering 17 Primetime Emmy Award nominations and winning five. Lange won her first Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Miniseries or a Movie after two previous nominations in the same category. She also received her eleventh Golden Globe Award nomination and second Screen Actors Guild Award nomination for her performance, losing both awards to Barrymore.

In 2011, Lange joined the cast of FX's horror anthology series "American Horror Story". Series co-creators Ryan Murphy and Brad Falchuk originally wrote her part as a supporting character, but after Lange acquired the role, they expanded it considerably. Murphy, a long-time admirer of Lange, stated that he chose her because he wanted to expose her work to a new generation of viewers. He also singled out her performance as Blanche DuBois on Broadway in 1992, which he saw twice, as his favorite performance, citing it as another motivating factor in hiring Lange. The show was a huge success not only for the network and creators, but also for Lange, who experienced a resurgence in her popularity, receiving rave reviews and several awards for her controversial role. She was chosen by "TV Guide", "Entertainment Weekly", and "MTV" for giving one of the "best performances of 2011". In addition, she won a second Primetime Emmy Award, a fifth Golden Globe Award, and her first Screen Actors Guild Award, after two previous nominations. She was also awarded a Special Achievement Satellite Award for Outstanding Performance in a Television Series by the International Press Academy and the Dorian Award for Best TV Performance of the Year by the "Gay and Lesbian Entertainment Critics Association" (GALECA). She was further nominated for the TCA Award for Individual Achievement in Drama, Critics' Choice Television Award, and Saturn Award.

In 2012, she had a supporting role in her "Grey Gardens" director Michael Suscy's box-office hit "The Vow", opposite Channing Tatum and Rachel McAdams, but also returned to star as the lead in the second season of "American Horror Story", titled "". Once again, she was chosen by "TV Guide" and "Entertainment Weekly" for giving one of the "best performances of 2012". She won a second Dorian Award for Best TV Performance of the Year by the GALECA, and received a fifth Emmy nomination, a thirteenth Golden Globe Award nomination, a fourth Screen Actors Guild Award nomination, a second Saturn Award nomination, and a second Critics' Choice Television Award nomination.

In 2013, the third season of "American Horror Story", "", garnered the series its highest ratings to that point, and has held the record for garnering the series its highest on-average ratings. Lange was joined by fellow film actors Kathy Bates and Angela Bassett. For her work on the show, Lange earned a third Primetime Emmy Award for Best Actress in a Movie or Miniseries, a third Dorian Award for Best TV Performance of the Year and her first Critic's Choice Television Award for Best Actress in a Movie or Miniseries. She also received her fourteenth Golden Globe nomination, her fifth Screen Actors Guild Award nomination and her fifth Satellite Award nomination for her performance on the series. In addition, Lange replaced Glenn Close in a film adaptation of Émile Zola's "Thérèse Raquin", directed by Charlie Stratton and titled "In Secret", co-starring Elizabeth Olsen, Tom Felton, Oscar Isaac, and Matt Lucas for which she received rave reviews.

Lange began 2014 by being honored with a nomination for a star on The Hollywood Walk of Fame, though she has yet to claim it. Lange was also recognized by "Elle Magazine" with the L'Oreal de Paris Legend Award presented to her by her friend Shirley MacLaine during "The Women in Hollywood Awards", honoring women for their outstanding achievements in film, spanning all aspects of the motion picture industry, including acting, directing, and producing. She was next honored with and became the first female recipient of the Kirk Douglas Award for Excellence in Film, presented to her by the Santa Barbara International Film Festival.

Later in the year, Marc Jacobs chose Lange to be the new face of Marc Jacobs Beauty. In addition, Lange would be featured in the brand's summer and fall print ad campaign photographed by David Sims, and would also star in a short campaign film directed by Jacobs. Previously, Jacobs dressed and interviewed Lange for "Love" magazine's fifth-anniversary issue, and had her provide a spoken-word version of "Happy Days Are Here Again" as the soundtrack for his autumn/winter 2014 show. She next starred opposite Mark Wahlberg in the remake of the 1970s action-thriller, "The Gambler", receiving rave reviews for her work. She also led the fourth season of "American Horror Story", titled "". The series, once again, topped its and the network's highest ratings, breaking all ratings records for both. Though self-admittedly not a singer, Lange's covers of David Bowie's "Life on Mars" and Lana Del Rey's "Gods and Monsters" for the show were both hugely popular, receiving heavy circulation on YouTube and charting in the top 50 on the iTunes music charts. For her work on the show, Lange received her seventh Primetime Emmy Award nomination, her fifteenth Golden Globe nomination, and her fourth Critics' Choice Television Award nomination. In 2015, Lange announced that she would not return for the series' fifth season. She followed her final season on "American Horror Story" with role opposite Shirley MacLaine and Demi Moore in the road-trip comedy, "Wild Oats", which wrapped production at the end of 2014. It premiered on Lifetime on August 22, 2016 before receiving a limited theatrical release on September 16, 2016.

In 2016, Lange had a supporting role in Louis C.K.'s critically acclaimed and Peabody Award-winning web series "Horace and Pete", which debuted on C.K.'s website on January 30, 2016. She next returned to Broadway alongside Michael Shannon, Gabriel Byrne and John Gallagher Jr. in a revival of "Long Day's Journey into Night" at the American Airlines Theatre, produced by Ryan Murphy and the Roundabout Theatre Company. The show was a critical and box-office hit, becoming the most Tony-nominated play of the season. For her performance, Lange garnered her first Tony Award for Best Performance by a Leading Actress in a Play nomination and win, an Outer Critics Circle Award for Best Lead Actress after one previous nomination, a Drama Desk Award for Outstanding Actress in a Play, and a "BroadwayWorld.com Award" for Best Leading Actress in a Play. She was also nominated for a Drama League Award for Distinguished Performance, a Time Out New York Award for Best Performance by an Actress in a Leading Role in a Play, and a Broadway.com Audience Choice Award for Favorite Actress in a Play.

On November 12, 2016, Lange was honored at the Camerimage Film Festival, where she was awarded the Krzysztof Kieślowski Award for Acting.

Lange next starred in FX's anthology series, "Feud", also serving as producer alongside Susan Sarandon, who also co-starred, and executive producers Ryan Murphy and Brad Pitt. The first season revolved around the infamous rivalry between Hollywood legends Bette Davis (Sarandon) and Joan Crawford (Lange), which came to a head during the making of the classic film, "Whatever Happened to Baby Jane?". Alfred Molina, Stanley Tucci, Judy Davis and Catherine Zeta-Jones co-starred. Production began in the fall of 2016 and it was released on March 5, 2017. The series was a critical and ratings hit, garnering Lange her eighth Emmy Award nomination for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Limited Series or Movie, her sixteenth Golden Globe Award nomination, her sixth SAG Award nomination, her fourth Critics Choice Award nomination and her second TCA Award nomination for Individual Achievement in Drama.

Lange was also honored by the Trinity Repertory Company's Pell Award for Lifetime Achievement in the Arts on May 23, 2017.

Lange is lined up to star opposite Naomi Watts in Gia Coppola's second film, "The Lonely Doll", adapted from Jean Nathan's memoir, "The Search for Dare Wright: The Secret Life of the Lonely Doll", which chronicled the life of Dare Wright (Watts) and her tempestuous relationship with her mother, Edith Stevenson Wright (Lange).

Lange was married to photographer Francisco "Paco" Grande from 1970 to 1981. Though they separated not long after moving to Europe during the mid-1970s, they did not divorce until the early 1980s, after which Lange paid him an undisclosed sum in alimony. From 1976 to 1982, she was partnered with renowned Russian ballet dancer Mikhail Baryshnikov, with whom she had her first child, Aleksandra "Shura" Baryshnikov (born 1981). During that time, she was also sporadically linked with Bob Fosse, with whom she remained friends until his death. 

In 1982, she met and entered into a relationship with playwright Sam Shepard. They had two children, Hannah Jane (born 1985) and Samuel Walker (born 1987), and lived together in Virginia, New Mexico, Minnesota, and eventually New York City, before separating in 2009.

Though she does not follow any set religion, she periodically practices Buddhism. She once admitted, "It's been a discipline that makes sense more than anything because it's like a science. I've never been a religious person. I've always looked for some kind of spiritual meaning. I didn't grow up going to church. My mother's family were atheists and my father's side was confused." She is also a vegetarian.

Lange has also revealed that she suffers from severe bouts of depression, once admitting, "I have never been a believer in psychoanalysis or therapy or anything like that. I've never done that." She confessed, "Though my dark side is dormant right now, it continues to play a big role in whatever capacity I have to be creative. That's the well I'm able to tap into, where all the anguish, rage and sadness are stored."

In 2008, Lange published her own collection of black-and-white pictures entitled "50 Photographs" (powerHouse Books) with a special introduction by Patti Smith. An exhibition of her work, along with a series of her films, was presented at the oldest international museum of photography and film, the George Eastman House, after which Lange was presented with the first George Eastman House Honors Award in 2009. In 2010, she published a second collection of photographs, "In Mexico". Most recently, she released a children's picture book called "It's About a Little Bird" (2013), while for the first time in Russia, she exhibited in Moscow's Multimedia Art Museum in 2014.

Lange is a Goodwill Ambassador for the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), specializing in the HIV/AIDS epidemic in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and in spreading awareness of the disease in Russia.

She has also been a public critic of former U.S. President George W. Bush, once calling his administration, "a self-serving regime of deceit, hypocrisy and belligerence," and has been a fervent human rights supporter of the Buddhist monks in Nepal.

In the early 1990s, she fostered a Romanian child with disabilities.



General

Specific



</doc>
<doc id="32788" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32788" title="Vivien Leigh">
Vivien Leigh

Vivien Leigh (born Vivian Mary Hartley, and also known as Lady Olivier after 1947; 5 November 19138 July 1967) was an English stage and film actress. She won two Academy Awards for Best Actress, for her iconic performances as Scarlett O'Hara in "Gone with the Wind" (1939) and Blanche DuBois in the film version of "A Streetcar Named Desire" (1951), a role she had also played on stage in London's West End in 1949. She also won a Tony Award for her work in the Broadway musical version of "Tovarich" (1963).

After completing her drama school education, Leigh appeared in small roles in four films in 1935 and progressed to the role of heroine in "Fire Over England" (1937). Lauded for her beauty, Leigh felt that her physical attributes sometimes prevented her from being taken seriously as an actress. Despite her fame as a screen actress, Leigh was primarily a stage performer. During her 30-year career, she played roles ranging from the heroines of Noël Coward and George Bernard Shaw comedies to classic Shakespearean characters such as Ophelia, Cleopatra, Juliet, and Lady Macbeth. Later in life, she performed as a character actress in a few films.

At the time, the public strongly identified Leigh with her second husband Laurence Olivier, who was her spouse from 1940 to 1960. Leigh and Olivier starred together in many stage productions, with Olivier often directing, and in three films. She earned a reputation for being difficult to work with, and for much of her adult life she suffered from bipolar disorder as well as recurrent bouts of chronic tuberculosis, which was first diagnosed in the mid-1940s and ultimately claimed her life at the age of 53. Although her career had periods of inactivity, in 1999 the American Film Institute ranked Leigh as the 16th greatest female movie star of classic Hollywood cinema.
Leigh was born Vivian Mary Hartley on 5 November 1913 in British India on the campus of St. Paul's School, Darjeeling. She was the only child of Ernest Richard Hartley, a British broker, and his wife, Gertrude Mary Frances (née Yackjee; she also used her mother's maiden name of Robinson). Her father was born in Scotland in 1882, while her mother, a devout Roman Catholic, was born in Darjeeling in 1888 and was of Irish descent. Gertrude's parents, who lived in India, were Michael John Yackjee (born 1840), a man of independent means, and Mary Teresa Robinson (born 1856), who was born to an Irish family killed during the Indian Rebellion of 1857 and grew up in an orphanage, where she met Yackjee; they married in 1872 and had five children, of whom Gertrude was the youngest. Ernest and Gertrude Hartley were married in 1912 in Kensington, London.

In 1917, Ernest Hartley was transferred to Bangalore as an officer in the Indian Cavalry, while Gertrude and Vivian stayed in Ootacamund. At the age of three, young Vivian made her first stage appearance for her mother's amateur theatre group, reciting "Little Bo Peep". Gertrude Hartley tried to instill an appreciation of literature in her daughter and introduced her to the works of Hans Christian Andersen, Lewis Carroll and Rudyard Kipling, as well as stories of Greek mythology and Indian folklore. At the age of six, Vivian was sent by her mother to the Convent of the Sacred Heart (now Woldingham School) then situated in Roehampton, southwest London, from Loreto Convent, Darjeeling. One of her friends there was future actress Maureen O'Sullivan, two years her senior, to whom Vivian expressed her desire to become "a great actress". She was removed from the school by her father, and travelling with her parents for four years, she attended schools in Europe, notably in Dinard, Biarritz, San Remo and Paris, becoming fluent in both French and Italian. The family returned to Britain in 1931. She attended "A Connecticut Yankee", one of O'Sullivan's films playing in London's West End, and told her parents of her ambitions to become an actress. Shortly after, her father enrolled Vivian at the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art (RADA) in London.

Vivian met Herbert Leigh Holman, known as Leigh Holman, a barrister 13 years her senior, in 1931. Despite his disapproval of "theatrical people", they married on 20 December 1932 and she terminated her studies at RADA, her attendance and interest in acting having already waned after meeting Holman. On 12 October 1933 in London, she gave birth to a daughter, Suzanne, later Mrs. Robin Farrington.

Leigh's friends suggested she take a small role as a schoolgirl in the film "Things Are Looking Up", which was her film debut, albeit uncredited as an extra. She engaged an agent, John Gliddon, who believed that "Vivian Holman" was not a suitable name for an actress. After rejecting his many suggestions, she took "Vivian Leigh" as her professional name. Gliddon recommended her to Alexander Korda as a possible film actress, but Korda rejected her as lacking potential. She was cast in the play "The Mask of Virtue", directed by Sidney Carroll in 1935, and received excellent reviews, followed by interviews and newspaper articles. One such article was from the "Daily Express", in which the interviewer noted "a lightning change came over her face", which was the first public mention of the rapid changes in mood which had become characteristic of her. John Betjeman, the future poet laureate, described her as "the essence of English girlhood". Korda attended her opening night performance, admitted his error, and signed her to a film contract. She continued with the play but, when Korda moved it to a larger theatre, Leigh was found to be unable to project her voice adequately or to hold the attention of so large an audience, and the play closed soon after. In the playbill, Carroll had revised the spelling of her first name to "Vivien".

In 1960 Leigh recalled her ambivalence towards her first experience of critical acclaim and sudden fame, commenting, "that some critics saw fit to be as foolish as to say that I was a great actress. And I thought, that was a foolish, wicked thing to say, because it put such an onus and such a responsibility onto me, which I simply wasn't able to carry. And it took me years to learn enough to live up to what they said for those first notices. I find it so stupid. I remember the critic very well and have never forgiven him."

Laurence Olivier saw Leigh in "The Mask of Virtue", and a friendship developed after he congratulated her on her performance. Olivier and Leigh began an affair while acting as lovers in "Fire Over England" (1937), but Olivier was still married to actress Jill Esmond. During this period, Leigh read the Margaret Mitchell novel "Gone with the Wind" and instructed her American agent to recommend her to David O. Selznick, who was planning a film version. She remarked to a journalist, "I've cast myself as Scarlett O'Hara", and "The Observer" film critic C. A. Lejeune recalled a conversation of the same period in which Leigh "stunned us all" with the assertion that Olivier "won't play Rhett Butler, but I shall play Scarlett O'Hara. Wait and see."

Despite her relative inexperience, Leigh was chosen to play Ophelia to Olivier's Hamlet in an Old Vic Theatre production staged at Elsinore, Denmark. Olivier later recalled an incident when her mood rapidly changed as she was preparing to go onstage. Without apparent provocation, she began screaming at him before suddenly becoming silent and staring into space. She was able to perform without mishap, and by the following day she had returned to normal with no recollection of the event. It was the first time Olivier witnessed such behaviour from her. They began living together, as their respective spouses had each refused to grant either of them a divorce. Under the moral standards then enforced by the film industry, their relationship had to be kept from public view.

Leigh appeared with Robert Taylor, Lionel Barrymore and Maureen O'Sullivan in "A Yank at Oxford" (1938), which was the first of her films to receive attention in the United States. During production, she developed a reputation for being difficult and unreasonable, partly because she disliked her secondary role but mainly because her petulant antics seemed to be paying dividends. After dealing with the threat of a lawsuit brought over a frivolous incident, Korda, however, instructed her agent to warn her that her option would not be renewed if her behaviour did not improve. Her next role was in "Sidewalks of London", also known as "St. Martin's Lane" (1938), with Charles Laughton.

Olivier had been attempting to broaden his film career. He was not well known in the United States despite his success in Britain, and earlier attempts to introduce him to American audiences had failed. Offered the role of Heathcliff in Samuel Goldwyn's production of "Wuthering Heights" (1939), he travelled to Hollywood, leaving Leigh in London. Goldwyn and the film's director, William Wyler, offered Leigh the secondary role of Isabella, but she refused, preferring the role of Cathy, which went to Merle Oberon.

Hollywood was in the midst of a widely publicized search to find an actress to portray Scarlett O'Hara in David O. Selznick's production of "Gone with the Wind" (1939). At the time, Myron Selznick—David's brother and Leigh's American theatrical agent—was the London representative of the Myron Selznick Agency. In February 1938, Leigh made a request to Myron Selznick that she be considered to play the part of Scarlett O'Hara.

David O. Selznick watched her performances that month in "Fire Over England" and "A Yank at Oxford" and thought that she was excellent but in no way a possible Scarlett because she was "too British". Leigh travelled to Los Angeles, however, to be with Olivier and to try to convince David Selznick that she was the person for the part. Myron Selznick also represented Olivier and when he met Leigh, he felt that she possessed the qualities that his brother was searching for. According to legend, Myron Selznick took Leigh and Olivier to the set where the burning of the Atlanta Depot scene was being filmed and stage-managed an encounter, where he introduced Leigh, derisively addressing his younger brother, "Hey, genius, meet your Scarlett O'Hara." The following day, Leigh read a scene for Selznick, who organized a screen test with director George Cukor and wrote to his wife, "She's the Scarlett dark horse and looks damn good. Not for anyone's ear but your own: it's narrowed down to Paulette Goddard, Jean Arthur, Joan Bennett and Vivien Leigh". The director, George Cukor, concurred and praised Leigh's "incredible wildness". She secured the role of Scarlett soon after.

Filming proved difficult for Leigh. Cukor was dismissed and replaced by Victor Fleming, with whom Leigh frequently quarrelled. She and Olivia de Havilland secretly met with Cukor at night and at weekends for his advice about how they should play their parts. Leigh befriended Clark Gable, his wife Carole Lombard and Olivia de Havilland; but she clashed with Leslie Howard, with whom she was required to play several emotional scenes. Leigh was sometimes required to work seven days a week, often late into the night, which added to her distress; and she missed Olivier, who was working in New York City. On a long-distance telephone call to Olivier, she declared: "Puss, my puss, how I hate film acting! Hate, hate, and never want to do another film again!"

Quoted in a 2006 biography of Olivier, Olivia de Havilland defended Leigh against claims of her manic behaviour during the filming of "Gone with the Wind": "Vivien was impeccably professional, impeccably disciplined on "Gone with the Wind". She had two great concerns: doing her best work in an extremely difficult role and being separated from Larry [Olivier], who was in New York."

"Gone with the Wind" brought Leigh immediate attention and fame; but she was quoted as saying, "I'm not a film star – I'm an actress. Being a film star – just a film star – is such a false life, lived for fake values and for publicity. Actresses go on for a long time and there are always marvellous parts to play." The film won 10 Academy Awards including a Best Actress award for Leigh, who also won a New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Actress.

In February 1940, Jill Esmond agreed to divorce Laurence Olivier, and Leigh Holman agreed to divorce Vivien, although they maintained a strong friendship for the rest of Leigh's life. Esmond was granted custody of Tarquin, her son with Olivier. Holman was granted custody of Suzanne, his daughter with Leigh. On 31 August 1940, Olivier and Leigh were married at the San Ysidro Ranch in Santa Barbara, California, in a ceremony attended only by their hosts, Ronald and Benita Colman and witnesses, Katharine Hepburn and Garson Kanin. Leigh had made a screen test and hoped to co-star with Olivier in "Rebecca", which was to be directed by Alfred Hitchcock with Olivier in the leading role. After viewing Leigh's screen test, David Selznick noted that "she doesn't seem right as to sincerity or age or innocence", a view shared by Hitchcock and Leigh's mentor, George Cukor.

Selznick observed that she had shown no enthusiasm for the part until Olivier had been confirmed as the lead actor, so he cast Joan Fontaine. He refused to allow her to join Olivier in "Pride and Prejudice" (1940), and Greer Garson played the role Leigh had wanted for herself. "Waterloo Bridge" (1940) was to have starred Olivier and Leigh; however, Selznick replaced Olivier with Robert Taylor, then at the peak of his success as one of Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer's most popular male stars. Her top billing reflected her status in Hollywood, and the film was popular with audiences and critics.

The Oliviers mounted a stage production of "Romeo and Juliet" for Broadway. The New York press publicised the adulterous nature of the beginning of Olivier and Leigh's relationship and questioned their ethics in not returning to the UK to help with the war effort.

Critics were hostile in their assessment of "Romeo and Juliet". Brooks Atkinson for "The New York Times" wrote: "Although Miss Leigh and Mr. Olivier are handsome young people, they hardly act their parts at all." While most of the blame was attributed to Olivier's acting and direction, Leigh was also criticised, with Bernard Grebanier commenting on the "thin, shopgirl quality of Miss Leigh's voice". The couple had invested almost all of their combined savings of $40,000 in the project, and the failure was a financial disaster for them.

The Oliviers filmed "That Hamilton Woman" (1941) with Olivier as Horatio Nelson and Leigh as Emma Hamilton. With the United States not yet having entered the war, it was one of several Hollywood films made with the aim of arousing a pro-British sentiment among American audiences. The film was popular in the United States and an outstanding success in the Soviet Union. Winston Churchill arranged a screening for a party that included Franklin D. Roosevelt and, on its conclusion, addressed the group, saying, "Gentlemen, I thought this film would interest you, showing great events similar to those in which you have just been taking part." The Oliviers remained favourites of Churchill, attending dinners and occasions at his request for the rest of his life; and, of Leigh, he was quoted as saying, "By Jove, she's a clinker."

The Oliviers returned to Britain in March 1943, and Leigh toured through North Africa that same year as part of a revue for the armed forces stationed in the region. She reportedly turned down a studio contract worth $5,000 a week to volunteer as part of the war effort. Leigh performed for troops before falling ill with a persistent cough and fevers. In 1944 she was diagnosed as having tuberculosis in her left lung and spent several weeks in hospital before appearing to have recovered. Leigh was filming "Caesar and Cleopatra" (1945) when she discovered she was pregnant, then had a miscarriage. Leigh temporarily fell into a deep depression that hit its low point, with her falling to the floor, sobbing in an hysterical fit. This was the first of many major bipolar disorder breakdowns. Olivier later came to recognise the symptoms of an impending episode – several days of hyperactivity followed by a period of depression and an explosive breakdown, after which Leigh would have no memory of the event, but would be acutely embarrassed and remorseful.

With her doctor's approval, Leigh was well enough to resume acting in 1946, starring in a successful London production of Thornton Wilder's "The Skin of Our Teeth"; but her films of this period, "Caesar and Cleopatra" (1945) and "Anna Karenina" (1948), were not great commercial successes. All British films in this period were adversely affected by a Hollywood boycott of British films.

In 1947 Olivier was knighted and Leigh accompanied him to Buckingham Palace for the investiture. She became Lady Olivier. After their divorce, according to the style granted to the divorced wife of a knight, she became known socially as Vivien, Lady Olivier.

By 1948 Olivier was on the board of directors for the Old Vic Theatre, and he and Leigh embarked on a six-month tour of Australia and New Zealand to raise funds for the theatre. Olivier played the lead in "Richard III" and also performed with Leigh in "The School for Scandal" and "The Skin of Our Teeth". The tour was an outstanding success and, although Leigh was plagued with insomnia and allowed her understudy to replace her for a week while she was ill, she generally withstood the demands placed upon her, with Olivier noting her ability to "charm the press". Members of the company later recalled several quarrels between the couple as Olivier was increasingly resentful of the demands placed on him during the tour. The most dramatic altercation occurred in Christchurch, New Zealand, when her shoes were not found and Leigh refused to go onstage without them. An exhausted and exasperated Olivier screamed an obscenity at her and slapped her face, and a devastated Leigh slapped him in return, dismayed that he would hit her publicly. Subsequently, she made her way to the stage in borrowed pumps, and in seconds, had "dried her tears and smiled brightly onstage". By the end of the tour, both were exhausted and ill. Olivier told a journalist, "You may not know it, but you are talking to a couple of walking corpses." Later, he would observe that he "lost Vivien" in Australia.

The success of the tour encouraged the Oliviers to make their first West End appearance together, performing the same works with one addition, "Antigone," included at Leigh's insistence because she wished to play a role in a tragedy.

Leigh next sought the role of Blanche DuBois in the West End stage production of Tennessee Williams's "A Streetcar Named Desire" and was cast after Williams and the play's producer Irene Mayer Selznick saw her in "The School for Scandal" and "Antigone"; Olivier was contracted to direct. The play contained a rape scene and references to promiscuity and homosexuality, and was destined to be controversial; the media discussion about its suitability added to Leigh's anxiety. Nevertheless, she believed strongly in the importance of the work.

When the West End production of "Streetcar" opened in October 1949, J. B. Priestley denounced the play and Leigh's performance; and the critic Kenneth Tynan, who was to make a habit of dismissing her stage performances, commented that Leigh was badly miscast because British actors were "too well-bred to emote effectively on stage". Olivier and Leigh were chagrined that part of the commercial success of the play lay in audience members attending to see what they believed would be a salacious story, rather than the Greek tragedy that they envisioned. The play also had strong supporters, among them Noël Coward, who described Leigh as "magnificent".

After 326 performances, Leigh finished her run, and she was soon assigned to reprise her role as Blanche DuBois in the film version of the play. Her irreverent and often bawdy sense of humour allowed her to establish a rapport with Brando, but she had an initial difficulty in working with director Elia Kazan, who was displeased with the direction that Olivier had taken in shaping the character of Blanche. Kazan had favoured Jessica Tandy and later, Olivia de Havilland over Leigh, but knew she had been a success on the London stage as Blanche. He later commented that he did not hold her in high regard as an actress, believing that "she had a small talent." As work progressed, however, he became "full of admiration" for "the greatest determination to excel of any actress I've known. She'd have crawled over broken glass if she thought it would help her performance." Leigh found the role gruelling and commented to the "Los Angeles Times", "I had nine months in the theatre of Blanche DuBois. Now she's in command of me." Olivier accompanied her to Hollywood where he was to co-star with Jennifer Jones in William Wyler's "Carrie" (1952).

Leigh's performance in "A Streetcar Named Desire" won glowing reviews, as well as a second Academy Award for Best Actress, a British Academy of Film and Television Arts (BAFTA) Award for Best British Actress, and a New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Actress. Tennessee Williams commented that Leigh brought to the role "everything that I intended, and much that I had never dreamed of". Leigh herself had mixed feelings about her association with the character; in later years, she said that playing Blanche DuBois "tipped me over into madness".

In 1951, Leigh and Laurence Olivier performed two plays about Cleopatra, William Shakespeare's "Antony and Cleopatra" and George Bernard Shaw's "Caesar and Cleopatra", alternating the play each night and winning good reviews. They took the productions to New York, where they performed a season at the Ziegfeld Theatre into 1952. The reviews there were also mostly positive, but film critic Kenneth Tynan angered them when he suggested that Leigh's was a mediocre talent that forced Olivier to compromise his own. Tynan's diatribe almost precipitated another collapse; Leigh, terrified of failure and intent on achieving greatness, dwelt on his comments and ignored the positive reviews of other critics.

In January 1953, Leigh travelled to Ceylon to film "Elephant Walk" with Peter Finch. Shortly after filming commenced, she had a nervous breakdown and Paramount Pictures replaced her with Elizabeth Taylor. Olivier returned her to their home in Britain, where, between periods of incoherence, Leigh told him she was in love with Finch and had been having an affair with him. Over a period of several months, she gradually recovered. As a result of this episode, many of the Oliviers' friends learned of her problems. David Niven said she had been "quite, quite mad". Noël Coward expressed surprise in his diary that "things had been bad and getting worse since 1948 or thereabouts". Leigh's romantic relationship with Finch began in 1948, and waxed and waned for several years, ultimately flickering out as her mental condition deteriorated.

Also in 1953, Leigh recovered sufficiently to play "The Sleeping Prince" with Olivier, and in 1955 they performed a season at Stratford-upon-Avon in Shakespeare's "Twelfth Night", "Macbeth", and "Titus Andronicus". They played to capacity houses and attracted generally good reviews, Leigh's health seemingly stable. John Gielgud directed "Twelfth Night" and wrote, "... perhaps I will still make a good thing of that divine play, especially if he will let me pull her little ladyship (who is brainier than he but "not" a born actress) out of her timidity and safeness. He dares too confidently ... but she hardly dares at all and is terrified of overreaching her technique and doing anything that she has not killed the spontaneity of by overpractice." In 1955 Leigh starred in Anatole Litvak's film "The Deep Blue Sea"; co-star Kenneth More felt he had poor chemistry with Leigh during the filming.

In 1956, Leigh took the lead role in the Noël Coward play "South Sea Bubble", but withdrew from the production when she became pregnant. Several weeks later, she miscarried and entered a period of depression that lasted for months. She joined Olivier for a European tour of "Titus Andronicus", but the tour was marred by Leigh's frequent outbursts against Olivier and other members of the company. After their return to London, her former husband, Leigh Holman, who could still exert a strong influence on her, stayed with the Oliviers and helped calm her.

In 1958, considering her marriage to be over, Leigh began a relationship with actor Jack Merivale, who knew of Leigh's medical condition and assured Olivier that he would care for her. In 1959, when she achieved a success with the Noël Coward comedy "Look After Lulu!", a critic working for "The Times" described her as "beautiful, delectably cool and matter of fact, she is mistress of every situation".

In 1960 she and Olivier divorced and Olivier soon married actress Joan Plowright. In his autobiography, Olivier discussed the years of strain they had experienced because of Leigh's illness: "Throughout her possession by that uncannily evil monster, manic depression, with its deadly ever-tightening spirals, she retained her own individual canniness – an ability to disguise her true mental condition from almost all except me, for whom she could hardly be expected to take the trouble."

Merivale proved to be a stabilising influence for Leigh, but despite her apparent contentment, she was quoted by Radie Harris as confiding that she "would rather have lived a short life with Larry [Olivier] than face a long one without him". Her first husband Leigh Holman also spent considerable time with her. Merivale joined her for a tour of Australia, New Zealand and Latin America that lasted from July 1961 until May 1962, and Leigh enjoyed positive reviews without sharing the spotlight with Olivier. Though she was still beset by bouts of depression, she continued to work in the theatre and, in 1963, won a Tony Award for Best Actress in a Musical for her role in "Tovarich". She also appeared in the films "The Roman Spring of Mrs. Stone" (1961) and "Ship of Fools" (1965).

Leigh's last screen appearance in "Ship of Fools" was both a triumph and emblematic of her illnesses that were taking root. Producer and director Stanley Kramer, who ended up with the film, planned to star Leigh but was initially unaware of her fragile mental and physical state. Later recounting her work, Kramer remembered her courage in taking on the difficult role, "She was ill, and the courage to go ahead, the courage to make the film – was almost unbelievable." Leigh's performance was tinged by paranoia and resulted in outbursts that marred her relationship with other actors, although both Simone Signoret and Lee Marvin were sympathetic and understanding. In one unusual instance during the attempted rape scene, Leigh became distraught and hit Marvin so hard with a spiked shoe, that it marked his face. Leigh won the "L'Étoile de Cristal" for her performance in a leading role in "Ship of Fools".

In May 1967 Leigh was rehearsing to appear with Michael Redgrave in Edward Albee's "A Delicate Balance" when her tuberculosis recurred. Following several weeks of rest, she seemed to recover. On the night of 7 July 1967, Merivale left her as usual at their Eaton Square flat to perform in a play, and he returned home just before midnight to find her asleep. About 30 minutes later (by now 8 July), he entered the bedroom and discovered her body on the floor. She had been attempting to walk to the bathroom and, as her lungs filled with liquid, she collapsed and suffocated. Merivale first contacted her family and later was able to reach Olivier, who was receiving treatment for prostate cancer in a nearby hospital. In his autobiography, Olivier described his "grievous anguish" as he immediately travelled to Leigh's residence, to find that Merivale had moved her body onto the bed. Olivier paid his respects, and "stood and prayed for forgiveness for all the evils that had sprung up between us", before helping Merivale make funeral arrangements; Olivier stayed until her body was removed from the flat.

Her death was publicly announced on 8 July, and the lights of every theatre in central London were extinguished for an hour. A Catholic service for Leigh was held at St. Mary's Church, Cadogan Street, London. Her funeral was attended by the luminaries of British stage and screen. According to the provisions of her will, Leigh was cremated at the Golders Green Crematorium and her ashes were scattered on the lake at her summer home, Tickerage Mill, near Blackboys, East Sussex, England. A memorial service was held at St Martin-in-the-Fields, with a final tribute read by John Gielgud. In 1968 Leigh became the first actress honoured in the United States, by "The Friends of the Libraries at the University of Southern California". The ceremony was conducted as a memorial service, with selections from her films shown and tributes provided by such associates as George Cukor, who screened the tests that Leigh had made for "Gone with the Wind", the first time the screen tests had been seen in 30 years.

Leigh was considered to be one of the most beautiful actresses of her day, and her directors emphasised this in most of her films. When asked if she believed her beauty had been an impediment to being taken seriously as an actress, she said, "People think that if you look fairly reasonable, you can't possibly act, and as I only care about acting, I think beauty can be a great handicap, if you really want to look like the part you're playing, which isn't necessarily like you."

Director George Cukor described Leigh as a "consummate actress, hampered by beauty", and Laurence Olivier said that critics should "give her credit for being an actress and not go on forever letting their judgments be distorted by her great beauty." Garson Kanin shared their viewpoint and described Leigh as "a stunner whose ravishing beauty often tended to obscure her staggering achievements as an actress. Great beauties are infrequently great actresses – simply because they don't need to be. Vivien was different; ambitious, persevering, serious, often inspired."

Leigh explained that she played "as many different parts as possible" in an attempt to learn her craft and to dispel prejudice about her abilities. She believed that comedy was more difficult to play than drama because it required more precise timing and said that more emphasis should be placed upon comedy as part of an actor's training. Nearing the end of her career, which ranged from Noël Coward comedies to Shakespearean tragedies, she observed, "It's much easier to make people cry than to make them laugh."

Her early performances brought her immediate success in Britain, but she remained largely unknown in other parts of the world until the release of "Gone with the Wind". In December 1939, film critic Frank Nugent wrote in "The New York Times", "Miss Leigh's Scarlett has vindicated the absurd talent quest that indirectly turned her up. She is so perfectly designed for the part by art and nature that any other actress in the role would be inconceivable", and as her fame escalated, she was featured on the cover of "Time" magazine as Scarlett. In 1969 critic Andrew Sarris commented that the success of the film had been largely due to "the inspired casting" of Leigh, and in 1998, wrote that "she lives in our minds and memories as a dynamic force rather than as a static presence". Film historian and critic Leonard Maltin described the film as one of the all-time greats, writing in 1998 that Leigh "brilliantly played" her role.

Her performance in the West End production of "A Streetcar Named Desire", described by the theatre writer Phyllis Hartnoll as "proof of greater powers as an actress than she had hitherto shown", led to a lengthy period during which she was considered one of the finest actresses in British theatre. Discussing the subsequent film version, Pauline Kael wrote that Leigh and Marlon Brando gave "two of the greatest performances ever put on film" and that Leigh's was "one of those rare performances that can truly be said to evoke both fear and pity."

Her greatest critic was Kenneth Tynan who ridiculed Leigh's performance opposite Olivier in the 1955 production of "Titus Andronicus", commenting that she "receives the news that she is about to be ravished on her husband's corpse with little more than the mild annoyance of one who would have preferred foam rubber." He was also critical of her reinterpretation of Lady Macbeth in 1955, saying that her performance was insubstantial and lacked the necessary fury demanded of the role. After her death, however, Tynan revised his opinion, describing his earlier criticism as "one of the worst errors of judgment" he had ever made. He came to believe that Leigh's interpretation, in which Lady Macbeth uses her sexual allure to keep Macbeth enthralled, "made more sense ... than the usual battle-axe" portrayal of the character. In a survey of theatre critics conducted shortly after Leigh's death, several named her performance as Lady Macbeth as one of her greatest achievements in theatre.

In 1969 a plaque to Leigh was placed in the Actors' Church, St Paul's, Covent Garden, London. In 1985 a portrait of her was included in a series of United Kingdom postage stamps, along with Sir Alfred Hitchcock, Sir Charlie Chaplin, Peter Sellers and David Niven to commemorate "British Film Year". In April 2013 she was again included in another series, this time celebrating the 100th anniversary of her birth, achieving the rare accolade for a non-royal of appearing on British stamps on more than one occasion.
The British Library in London purchased the papers of Laurence Olivier from his estate in 1999. Known as "The Laurence Olivier Archive", the collection includes many of Vivien Leigh's personal papers, including numerous letters she wrote to Olivier. The papers of Vivien Leigh, including letters, photographs, contracts and diaries, are owned by her daughter, Mrs. Suzanne Farrington. In 1994 the National Library of Australia purchased a photograph album, monogrammed "L & V O" and believed to have belonged to the Oliviers, containing 573 photographs of the couple during their 1948 tour of Australia. It is now held as part of the record of the history of the performing arts in Australia. In 2013, an archive of Vivien Leigh's letters, diaries, photographs, annotated film and theatre scripts and her numerous awards was acquired by the Victoria and Albert Museum.



</doc>
<doc id="225497" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=225497" title="Louise Fletcher">
Louise Fletcher

Estelle Louise Fletcher (born July 22, 1934) is an American actress. 

She had her acting debut in the television series "Yancy Derringer" in 1958. She guest starred in the television series "Wagon Train" in 1959 before making her film debut in "A Gathering of Eagles" in 1963. In 1974, after a decade-long hiatus from acting in which she raised a family, Fletcher was cast in Robert Altman's "Thieves Like Us". The following year, Fletcher gained international recognition for her performance as Nurse Ratched in the drama film "One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest" (1975), for which she won the Academy Award for Best Actress, BAFTA Award for Best Actress in a Leading Role and Golden Globe Award for Best Actress. She became only the third actress to ever win an Academy Award, BAFTA Award and Golden Globe Award for a single performance, after Audrey Hepburn and Liza Minnelli. Other notable film roles include "" (1977), "Brainstorm" (1983), "Firestarter" (1984), "Flowers in the Attic" (1987), "2 Days in the Valley" (1996), and "Cruel Intentions" (1999).

Later in her career, Fletcher returned to television, appearing as Winn Adami in "" (1993–1999), as well as receiving Primetime Emmy Award nominations for her guest-starring roles in the television series "Picket Fences" (1996) and "Joan of Arcadia" (2004). From 2011 to 2012, she appeared in a recurring role on the Showtime television series "Shameless", as Frank Gallagher's foul-mouthed and hard-living mother who is serving a prison sentence for manslaughter. More recently, she portrayed the recurring role of Rosie on the Netflix series "Girlboss" (2017).

Fletcher was born in Birmingham, Alabama, the second of four children to Estelle Caldwell and the Reverend Robert Capers Fletcher, an Episcopal missionary from Arab, Alabama. Both of her parents were deaf and worked with the deaf and hard-of-hearing. 

Fletcher's father founded more than forty churches for the deaf in Alabama. Fletcher and her siblings, Roberta, John and Georgianna, were all born without any hearing loss; she was taught to speak by a hearing aunt, who also introduced her to acting. After attending the University of North Carolina, she traveled to Los Angeles, California, where she found work as a secretary by day and received acting lessons by night.

Fletcher began appearing in several television series, including "Lawman" in 1958 and "Maverick" in 1959. (The "Maverick" episode, "The Saga of Waco Williams", was the series' highest-rated episode.) Also in 1959, she appeared in the second episode of the original "Untouchables" TV series (starring Robert Stack), "Ma Barker and Her Boys" as Elouise. In 1960 Fletcher made two guest appearances on "Perry Mason", both times as the defendant: Gladys Doyle in "The Case of the Mythical Monkeys," and Susan Connolly in "The Case of the Larcenous Lady." In the summer of 1960, she was cast as Roberta McConnell in the episode "The Bounty Hunter" of the NBC western television series, "Tate", starring David McLean.

In 1974, she returned to film in "Thieves Like Us", co-produced by her husband and Robert Altman, who also directed. When the two had a falling out on Altman's next project, ("Nashville" (1975)), Altman decided to cast Lily Tomlin for the role of Linnea Reese, initially created for and by Fletcher. Meanwhile, director Miloš Forman saw Fletcher in "Thieves" and consequently cast her as McMurphy's nemesis Nurse Ratched in "One Flew Over The Cuckoo's Nest" (1975). Fletcher gained international recognition and fame for the role, winning Academy Award for Best Actress, as well as a BAFTA Award and Golden Globe. When Fletcher accepted her Oscar, she used sign language to thank her parents.

After "Cuckoo's Nest", Fletcher had mixed success in film. She made several financially and critically successful films, while others were box office failures. Fletcher's film roles were in such features as "" (1977), "The Cheap Detective" (1978), "The Lady in Red" (1979), "The Magician of Lublin" (1979), "Brainstorm" (1983), "Firestarter" (1984), "Invaders From Mars" (1986), "Flowers in the Attic" (1987), "Two Moon Junction" (1988), "Best of the Best" (1989), "Blue Steel" (1990), "Virtuosity" (1995), "High School High" (1996), and "Cruel Intentions" (1999, as Sebastian's aunt). Additionally, she played the character Ruth Shorter, a supporting role, in the 2005 film "Aurora Borealis" alongside Joshua Jackson and Donald Sutherland, and appeared in the Fox Faith film "The Last Sin Eater" (2007).

Fletcher co-starred in such made-for-TV movies as " The Karen Carpenter Story" (1989) (as Karen and Richard Carpenter's mother, Agnes), "Nightmare on the 13th Floor" (1990), "The Haunting of Seacliff Inn" (1994), and "The Stepford Husbands" (1996). From 1993 to 1999, she held a recurring role in "" as the scheming Bajoran religious leader Kai Winn Adami. She also earned Emmy Award nominations for her guest roles on the Tom Skerritt's CBS television series, "Picket Fences" (1996), and later on "Joan of Arcadia" (2004). In 2009, Fletcher appeared in the NBC series "Heroes" as the physician mother of character Emma Coolidge. In 2011, she appeared in the Showtime series "Shameless" as Grammy Gallagher, Frank Gallagher's foul-mouthed and hard-living mother who is serving a prison sentence for manslaughter related to a meth lab explosion.

Fletcher married literary agent and producer Jerry Bick in 1960, divorcing in 1977. The couple had two sons, John Dashiell Bick and Andrew Wilson Bick. Fletcher took an 11-year hiatus from acting to raise her sons. Fletcher received an honorary degree from Gallaudet University in 1982.


</doc>
<doc id="68322" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68322" title="Faye Dunaway">
Faye Dunaway

Dorothy Faye Dunaway (born January 14, 1941) is an American actress. She has won an Academy Award, three Golden Globes, a BAFTA, an Emmy, and was the first recipient of a Leopard Club Award that honors film professionals whose work has left a mark on the collective imagination. In 2011, the government of France made her an Officer of the Order of Arts and Letters.

Dunaway’s career began in the early 1960s on Broadway. She made her screen debut in the 1967 film "The Happening", and rose to fame that same year with her portrayal of outlaw Bonnie Parker in Arthur Penn's "Bonnie and Clyde", for which she received her first Academy Award nomination. Her most notable films include the crime caper "The Thomas Crown Affair" (1968), the drama "The Arrangement" (1969), the revisionist western "Little Big Man" (1970), an adaptation of the Alexandre Dumas classic "The Three Musketeers" (1973), the neo-noir mystery "Chinatown" (1974), for which she earned her second Oscar nomination, the action-drama disaster "The Towering Inferno" (1974), the political thriller "Three Days of the Condor" (1975), the satirical "Network" (1976), for which she received an Academy Award for Best Actress, and the thriller "Eyes of Laura Mars" (1978).

Dunaway's career evolved to more mature and character roles in subsequent years, often in independent films, beginning with her controversial portrayal of Joan Crawford in the 1981 film "Mommie Dearest". Other notable films in which she has appeared include the drama "Barfly" (1987), the surrealist comedy-drama "Arizona Dream" (1993), the biopic "Gia" (1998), and the black comedy "The Rules of Attraction" (2002). Dunaway also performed on stage in several plays including "A Man for All Seasons" (1961–63), "After the Fall" (1964), "Hogan's Goat" (1965–67), "A Streetcar Named Desire" (1973) and was awarded the Sarah Siddons Award for her portrayal of opera singer Maria Callas in "Master Class" (1996).

She is protective of her private life, rarely gives interviews, and makes very few public appearances. After romantic relationships with Jerry Schatzberg and Marcello Mastroianni, Dunaway married twice, first with singer Peter Wolf and then with photographer Terry O'Neill, with whom she had a son, Liam.

Dunaway was born in Bascom, Florida, the daughter of Grace April (née Smith; 1922–2004), a housewife, and John MacDowell Dunaway, Jr. (1920–1984), a career non-commissioned officer in the United States Army. She is of Scots-Irish, English, and German descent. She spent her childhood traveling throughout the United States and Europe.

Dunaway took dance classes, tap, piano and singing, and then studied at Florida State University and University of Florida, and graduated from the Boston University with a degree in theatre. She spent the summer before her senior year in a summer stock company at Harvard's Loeb Drama Center, where one of her co-players was Jane Alexander, the actress and future head of the National Endowment for the Arts. In 1962, at the age of 21, she took acting classes at the American National Theater and Academy. She was spotted by Lloyd Richards while performing in a production of "The Crucible", and was recommended to director Elia Kazan, who was in search of young talent for his Lincoln Center Repertory Company.

Shortly after graduating from Boston University, Dunaway was already appearing on Broadway as a replacement in Robert Bolt's drama "A Man for All Seasons". She subsequently appeared in Arthur Miller's "After the Fall" and the award-winning "Hogan's Goat" by Harvard professor William Alfred, who became her mentor and spiritual advisor. "With the exception of my mother, my brother, and my beloved son, Bill Alfred has been without question the most important single figure in my lifetime. A teacher, a mentor, and I suppose the father I never had, the parent and companion I would always have wanted, if that choice had been mine. He has taught me so much about the virtue of a simple life, about spirituality, about the purity of real beauty, and how to go at this messy business of life."

Dunaway's first screen role was the comedy crime film "The Happening" (1967), which starred Anthony Quinn. Her performance earned her good notices from critics, however Roger Ebert of "The Chicago Sun-Times" panned the performance saying that she "exhibits a real neat trick of resting her cheek on the back of her hand." That same year, she had a supporting role in Otto Preminger's drama "Hurry Sundown", opposite Michael Caine and Jane Fonda. Filming proved to be difficult for Dunaway as she clashed with Preminger, whom she felt didn't know "anything at all about the process of acting." She later described this experience as a "psychodrama that left me feeling damaged at the end of each day." Dunaway had signed a six-picture deal with Preminger but decided during the filming to get her contract back. "As much as it cost me to get out of the deal with Otto, if I'd had to do those movies with him, then I wouldn't have done "Bonnie and Clyde", or "The Thomas Crown Affair", or any of the movies I was suddenly in a position to choose to do. Beyond the movies I might have missed, it would have been a kind of Chinese water torture to have been stuck in five more terrible movies. It's impossible to assess the damage that might have done to me that early on in my career." The film was a critical and commercial failure but earned Dunaway a Golden Globe Award nomination, for Best New Star of the Year.
Dunaway had tried to get an interview with director Arthur Penn when he was directing "The Chase" (1966), but was rebuffed by a casting director who didn't think she had the right face for the movies. When Penn saw her scenes from "The Happening" before its release, he decided to let her read for the role of the bank robber Bonnie Parker for his upcoming film, "Bonnie and Clyde". Casting for the role of Bonnie had proved to be difficult and many actresses had been considered for the role, including Jane Fonda, Tuesday Weld, Ann-Margret, Carol Lynley, Leslie Caron, and Natalie Wood. Penn loved Dunaway and managed to convince actor and producer, Warren Beatty, who played Clyde Barrow in the film, that she was right for the part. Besides her relative anonymity, Beatty's concern was her "extraordinary bone structure," which he thought might be inappropriate for Bonnie Parker, a local girl trying to look innocent while she held up smalltown Texas banks. However, he changed his mind after seeing some photographs of Dunaway taken by Curtis Hanson on the beach, "She could hit the ball across the net, and she had an intelligence and a strength that made her both powerful and romantic." Dunaway only had a few weeks to prepare for the role and, when she was asked to lose weight to give her character a Depression-era look, she went on a starvation diet, stopped eating and dropped thirty pounds.

The film was controversial on its original release for its supposed glorification of murderers, and for its level of graphic violence, which was unprecedented at the time. It performed well at the box office and elevated Dunaway to stardom. Roger Ebert gave the film a rave review and wrote, "The performances throughout are flawless. Warren Beatty and Faye Dunaway, in the title roles, surpass anything they have done on the screen before and establish themselves (somewhat to my surprise) as major actors." The film was nominated for ten Academy Awards, including Best Picture, and Dunaway received her first nomination for Best Actress. Her performance earned her a BAFTA Award for Best Newcomer and a David di Donatello for Best Foreign Actress, and she was now among the most bankable actresses in Hollywood, as she later recalled. "It put me firmly in the ranks of actresses that would do work that was art. There are those who elevate the craft of acting to the art of acting, and now I would be among them. I was the golden girl at that time. One of those women who was going to be nominated year after year for an Oscar and would win at least one. The movie established the quality of my work. "Bonnie and Clyde" would also turn me into a star."

Dunaway followed this success with another hit, "The Thomas Crown Affair" (1968), in which she played Vicki Anderson, an insurance investigator who becomes involved with Thomas Crown, a millionaire, played by Steve McQueen, who attempts to pull off the perfect crime. Director Norman Jewison hired Dunaway after he saw scenes from "Bonnie and Clyde" before its release and, like Arthur Penn did with Warren Beatty, had to convince McQueen that she was right for the part. The film emphasized Dunaway's sensuality and elegance with a character who has remained an influential style icon. The role required over 29 costume changes and was a complex one to play. "Vicki's dilemma was, at the time, a newly emerging phenomenon for women: How does one do all of this in a man's world and not sacrifice one's emotional and personal life in the process?" Despite his original reluctance to work with her, McQueen later called Dunaway the best actress he ever worked with. Dunaway was also very fond of McQueen. "It was really my first time to play opposite someone who was a great big old movie star, and that's exactly what Steve was. He was one of the best-loved actors around, one whose talent more than equaled his sizable commercial appeal." The film was immensely popular, and was famed for a scene where Dunaway and McQueen play a chess game and silently engage in heavy seduction of each other across the board.

Following the completion of "The Thomas Crown Affair", Dunaway began filming Vittorio de Sica's romantic drama, "A Place for Lovers" (1968), with Marcello Mastroianni, in which she played a terminally ill American fashion designer in Venice who has a whirlwind affair with a race car driver. Although Dunaway had always wanted to avoid romances with her co-stars, she began a love affair with Mastroianni that lasted for two years. The film was an artistic disappointment and a commercial failure. In 1969, Dunaway appeared in "The Arrangement", a drama directed by Elia Kazan, based upon his novel of the same title, opposite Kirk Douglas. The film did poorly at the box office, receiving mostly negative reviews, although Dunaway was praised, with Roger Ebert writing that her acting "is not only the equal of in "Bonnie and Clyde" but is, indeed, the only good acting she has done since." Vincent Canby of "The New York Times" wrote that she was "looking so cool and elegant that the sight of her almost pinches the optic nerves." Also in 1969, "The Extraordinary Seaman", a comedy adventure directed by John Frankenheimer and also starring David Niven that she shot right after "Bonnie and Clyde", was released to poor reviews and proved to be a commercial failure. Despite protests from her agent, Dunaway turned down a lot of high-profile projects in order to spend time with Mastroianni.
In 1970, Dunaway took a supporting role as a favor to Arthur Penn in his western, "Little Big Man". In a rare comic role, Dunaway played the sexually frustrated wife of a minister who helps raise and seduce a boy raised by Native Americans, played by Dustin Hoffman. The film was widely praised by critics and was one of Dunaway's few commercial successes at this point. That same year, she appeared in the lead role in "Puzzle of a Downfall Child" (1970), an experimental drama directed by Jerry Schatzberg and inspired by the life of model Anne St. Marie. The film failed to generate commercial interest, though it earned for Dunaway a second Golden Globe nomination, for Best Actress – Motion Picture Drama. The film remained in obscurity over 40 years, until it was revived at the 2011 Cannes Film Festival in honor of Dunaway. Her next role was in the western "Doc" (1971), which tells the story of the gunfight at the O.K. Corral and of one of its protagonists, Doc Holliday. During the filming, Dunaway realized how much she missed working. That same year, she went on to make the French thriller "The Deadly Trap" with Frank Langella. It was a chance for her to work with one of the most widely respected postwar directors in France, René Clément. The film was screened only five months after the first day of shooting at the 1971 Cannes Film Festival, but was not entered into the main competition.

Neither "Doc" nor "The Deadly Trap" had generated much attention, either critically or financially, so Dunaway accepted an offer to star in a movie for television, "The Woman I Love" (1972), in which she portrayed Wallis Simpson. She returned to film in 1973 with Stanley Kramer's drama, "Oklahoma Crude", opposite George C. Scott. It was an ambitious project in which Dunaway had to play another complex character, "a woman who is caught between her ambition and her feminity. When the film opens, she is as tough as nails, a shoot-first-and-ask-questions-later woman. Along the way, she slowly opens herself up to her estranged father and a lover. I understood that dilemma well, the conflict between ambition and love, the fear of trusting someone else with your love." The film was a modest success but Dunaway received good notices for her performance. In his review of the film, Roger Ebert noted how she had never topped the work she did in "Bonnie and Clyde," and said that her career had been "rather absentminded" ever since. He praised her performance in "Oklahoma Crude", saying that she played the role with "a great deal of style," while adding, "Perhaps she has decided to get back to acting."

In 1972, following the filming of "Oklahoma Crude", Dunaway returned to the stage in an adaptation of Harold Pinter's "Old Times". She found the stage more challenging than film. ""Old Times" affected me in a lot of very complex ways. The play itself reminded me during a difficult point in my life that there are a million facets to life. There is never just one answer. Professionally, if I hadn't taken that step to go back to the stage, in a serious way, I think I would have suffered for it." The following year, Dunaway portrayed Blanche DuBois in a Los Angeles stage adaptation of Tennessee Williams's "A Streetcar Named Desire". "It was a fun performance for me, but hard, very draining. At the height of the madness each night, I would go from standing straight up to falling to my knees, in one swift move." Williams himself praised Dunaway for her performance, "He told me later that he thought I was brave and adorable and reminded him of a precocious child, and that my performance ranked with the very best. It was high praise indeed coming from him." Also in 1973, Dunaway appeared as the villainous Milady de Winter in Richard Lester's "The Three Musketeers", based on Alexandre Dumas' novel of the same name, co-starring Michael York, Oliver Reed, Richard Chamberlain and Charlton Heston. Eventually, producers decided to split the film into two parts: "The Three Musketeers" and "The Four Musketeers" (released in 1974). Critics and audiences alike praised the film for its action and its comic tone, and it was the first in a line of successful projects for Dunaway.

Director Roman Polanski offered Dunaway the lead role of Evelyn Mulwray in his mystery neo-noir "Chinatown" (1974). Although its producer, Robert Evans, wanted Polanski to consider Jane Fonda for the role, arguing that Dunaway had a reputation for temperament, Polanski insisted on using Dunaway. She accepted the challenging and complex role of Mulwray, a shadowy femme fatale who knows more than she is willing to let Detective J.J. Gittes (played by Jack Nicholson) know. Dunaway got along well with Nicholson, describing him later as a "soul mate," but she clashed with Polanski, who had a reputation for being dictatorial and controlling on a set. "Roman was very much an autocrat, always forcing things. It ranged from the physical to the mental. He was very domineering and abrasive and made it clear he wanted to manipulate the performance. That approach has never worked with me."

Two weeks after the filming started, the two had a confrontation that became notorious. Polanski pulled one of Dunaway's hairs out of her head, without telling her, because it was catching the light. Dunaway was offended, describing his act as "sadistic" and left the set furious. "It was not the hair, it was the incessant cruelty that I felt, the constant sarcasm, the never-ending need to humiliate me." Years later, both shared their admiration for each other, with Polanski saying that their feud was not important — "It’s the result that counts. And she was formidable," while Dunaway admitted that "it was way too much made out of it," added that she enjoyed working with Polanski, calling him "a great director," and stated that "Chinatown" was "possibly the best film I ever made."

Despite the complications on the set, the film was finished, released to glowing reviews and ultimately became a classic. It made back its budget almost five times, and received 11 Academy Award nominations. Dunaway received a second Best Actress nomination, and also received a Golden Globe nomination and a BAFTA nomination. Upon the release of the film, producer Robert Evans was full of praise for Dunaway. "She has everything—beauty, talent, neurosis. She's one of the great strange ones. When the lights go out and that face comes out of the dark and she looks at you with those big mysterious eyes, I tell you, it's a very compelling thing. She has something we haven't seen on the screen for a long time. She has witchery. She's a femme fatale."

That same year, Dunaway appeared in a television adaptation of "After the Fall" with Christopher Plummer. She played the lead role, which was for her "like a dream come true. As with Bonnie, I knew the territory well. Maggie (her character) was a completely wounded soul, a girl who had grown up on the wrong side of the tracks." She next played Paul Newman's girlfriend who is trapped in a burning skyscraper along with several hundred other people in the all-star disaster epic, "The Towering Inferno" (1974). The film became the highest-grossing film of the year, further cementing Dunaway as a top actress in Hollywood. Also in 1974, Dunaway married Peter Wolf, who was the lead singer of the rock group The J. Geils Band. At this time, she felt "exhausted from the constant and intense pressures of the work," and decided to pull out of "The Wind and the Lion" (1975), in which she was to costar with Sean Connery, at the last moment to concentrate on her married life.

Her next feature was Sydney Pollack's political thriller, "Three Days of the Condor" (1975). Her character was to be held hostage by a CIA analyst, played by Robert Redford, and Dunaway was required to display fear that she might be raped. However, she had difficulty not breaking into laughter during the shoot as "the idea of being kidnapped and ravaged by Robert Redford was anything but frightening." The film was a critical and commercial success, and Dunaway's performance, which was praised by the critics, earned her a fifth Golden Globe nomination. In his review of the film, Roger Ebert called her character "the very embodiment of pluck," and said that, "She has three lines of dialogue that brings the house down. They're obscene and funny and poignant all at once, and Dunaway delivers them just marvelously." Dunaway took a break from acting and spent almost a year turning down projects. She passed on a role in Alfred Hitchcock's final film, the comic thriller "Family Plot", which she later lamented. She returned to the screen in 1976 with the Holocaust drama "Voyage of the Damned". The story was inspired by true events concerning the fate of the ocean liner carrying Jewish refugees from Germany to Cuba in 1939.
That same year, Dunaway appeared in the Paddy Chayefsky-scripted satire "Network" as the scheming TV executive Diana Christensen, a ruthless woman who will do anything for higher ratings. She loved the script and later said this was "the only film I ever did that you didn't touch the script because it was almost as if it were written in verse." She pursued the role over the objections of her husband, Peter Wolf, and her confidant, William Alfred, who regarded Christensen as too heartless and were concerned that people would confuse her with the character. However, Dunaway believed it was "one of the most important female roles to come along in years" and went along with Chayevsky's conception and director Sidney Lumet's warning that she would not be allowed to sneak in any weeping or softness, and that it would remain on the cutting room floor if she did.

The film, a success in its own day, is frequently discussed today due to its almost prophetic take on the television industry. Dunaway's performance was lauded, with Vincent Canby of "The New York Times" saying that she "in particular, is successful in making touching and funny a woman of psychopathic ambition and lack of feeling." Dunaway's performance in "Network" earned her many awards. She was named Best Actress in the Kansas City Film Critics Awards, and she also received mentions from the New York Film Critics Circle and the National Society of Film Critics. She received her sixth Golden Globe nomination for "Network" and was awarded Best Actress in a Motion Picture – Drama. In early 1977, the Academy Awards nominated "Network" for ten awards, with Dunaway winning in her third Best Actress nomination.

Also in 1976, Dunaway appeared as the lead in the made-for-television movie, "The Disappearance of Aimee", in which she co-starred with Bette Davis. Following her Oscar win, Dunaway took another break from acting to figure out her personal life. As her marriage was falling apart, she began a relationship with English photographer Terry O'Neill, who took one of his most famous pictures, "The Morning After", showing Dunaway poolside at the Beverly Hills Hotel with her Oscar the morning after the ceremony. In 1978, Dunaway returned to the screen in Irvin Kershner's thriller "Eyes of Laura Mars", about a fashion photographer who sees visions of a killer murdering people. The film was a success at the box office and Dunaway received positive reviews for her performance, with Janet Maslin writing for "The New York Times" that she was "perfect for her role." She played supporting roles in "The Champ" (1979), as the film offered her the chance to play the role of a mother, "which was emotionally where I wanted to be in my life," and "The First Deadly Sin" (1980), as she wanted to work with Frank Sinatra. In 1981, Dunaway played the title role in "Evita Peron", a television miniseries based on the life of the famed First Lady of Argentina.
That same year, Dunaway portrayed actress Joan Crawford in the adaptation of her daughter Christina's controversial memoirs, "Mommie Dearest", in which she had depicted her adopted mother as an abusive tyrant, who only adopted her four children to promote her acting career, making quite a stir as the first celebrity tell-all book. Dunaway accepted the role after meeting producer Frank Yablans and director Frank Perry, who both assured her that they wanted to tell the real story of Joan Crawford and not just a tabloid version of her life. "Though Christina's book was obviously an exploitation book, the first one of its kind, my task was to portray a woman, a full woman who she was in all her facets, not just one. I tried to illuminate who this woman was. But it was more than just about being angry, it was about trying to examine and explore the forces that undermined her." To play the role, Dunaway researched Crawford's films and met with many of her friends and co-workers, including director George Cukor. Filming proved difficult for her as she was almost never out of character. "If your mind is on a woman who is dead and you’re trying to find out who she was and do right by her, you do feel a presence. I felt it at home at night sometimes. It wasn’t pleasant. I felt Joan was not at rest." After the infamous wire hangers tantrum scene, Dunaway was so hoarse from screaming that she lost her voice. Frank Sinatra drove her to see a throat specialist and shared his own tips on how to preserve her voice.

The film in 1981 and was a commercial success despite negative reviews. Dunaway's uncanny performance earned her two Best Actress award nominations by the New York Film Critics Circle Awards and the National Society of Film Critics Awards, and was lauded by critics. Janet Maslin, while dismissing the film as incoherent, wrote that Dunaway's performance was "a small miracle" and praised her energy and commitment to the role. The frequently harsh Pauline Kael raved about Dunaway's performance, stating that she had reached new heights as an actress and surmised that it would be difficult for Dunaway to top her performance as Crawford. Vincent Canby also praised Dunaway, writing that ""Mommie Dearest" doesn't work very well, but the ferocious intensity of Faye Dunaway's impersonation does, as does the film's point of view, which succeeds in making Joan Crawford into a woman far more complicated, more self-aware and more profoundly disturbed than the mother remembered in Christina Crawford's book." Director Sidney Lumet stated that it was "a brilliant, an extraordinary performance. The courage of that evil that she brings to it, I think that’s just major acting." Although the film became a cult classic as well as one of her most famous characters, Dunaway expressed her regrets for playing Crawford as she felt "it was meant to be a window into a tortured soul. But it was made into camp." She also blamed the film for hurting her career and almost never agreed to discuss it in interviews afterwards.

In 1982, Dunaway appeared in a television adaptation of Clifford Odets's dramatic play "The Country Girl" as the wife of a washed-up alcoholic singer played by Dick Van Dyke, whom she later described as "one of the sweetest and funniest men in the world," but admitted "Though it was a valiant effort on all our parts, and there were moments were I thought were good and true, the remake fell short of our hopes and certainly of the original. But doing it helped remind of that I do love this business of acting, something the Crawford movie had come close to making me forget." That same year, she returned to the stage with "The Curse of an Aching Heart" in a part she later felt she had been miscast in. "It was a little bit too star-heavy with me in it. The play would have been better with just the simplest of women." Despite her mixed feelings about it, her performance earned her good reviews from the critics, with Frank Rich writing for "The New York Times" that "Miss Dunaway's absence from the theater has not dimmed her stage technique. She's usually in command."
During this time, Dunaway moved to England with her partner Terry O'Neill, whom she married in 1983, and, being more interested in her married life, only took on work that was convenient for her. That same year, she returned to the screen in Michael Winner's period melodrama "The Wicked Lady", in which she played an 18th-century highway robber. The film proved to be a critical and commercial failure. "Though I loved making "The Wicked Lady", in the end it just didn't have the juice it needed to be a hit. It seemed to never quite decide whether to be a farce or a drama, and so it failed by being neither."

In 1984, Dunaway played the lead villain in the superhero movie "Supergirl". She felt that "the film was really just a send-up, a spoof, and I had a lot of fun with Selena (her character)" but later admitted she was furious with the director Jeannot Szwarc, "Every time I tried to do something funny, he wouldn't let me. He said, "you have to be the straight person". I always wanted to do comedy but it's daunting when you've not done it before." Also in 1984, Dunaway appeared in a television miniseries, "Ellis Island", which earned her a second Golden Globe Award, for Best Supporting Actress – Series, Miniseries or Television Film. The following year, she starred in the miniseries, "Christopher Columbus". She also appeared in two Agatha Christie adaptations, "Ordeal by Innocence" and "Thirteen at Dinner" (which was made for television). Though the work was involving, Dunaway struggled to find artistically fulfilling roles during this period in England. "I missed doing movies. The television scripts I was getting were thin. There is no comparison between those and a "Chinatown" script." "Though I had worked steadily in England, it felt as if I had disappeared completely. I was rapidly becoming invisible. I felt increasingly that my career was being limited to, and limited by, the projects that were being mounted there." Following her divorce from O'Neill in 1987, Dunaway returned to the United States and attempted to rebuild her career by appearing in several independent dramas.

Dunaway was widely praised for her performance as an alcoholic opposite Mickey Rourke in Barbet Schroeder's drama "Barfly" (1987). Based on a novel by Charles Bukowski, the film was very important to her as she later explained, "This character, who has given over her days and nights to a bottle, is my way back to the light. This is a role that I care deeply about. I haven't felt this passion for a character since "Network". I saw the promise of a comeback for me in the deglamorized face of Wanda, a woman of sweet vulnerability." The film was a small success at the box office, but received excellent reviews from critics and Dunaway earned her sixth Golden Globe Award nomination, for Best Actress – Motion Picture Drama. Pauline Kael wrote that "Dunaway plays the self-destructive Wanda with a minimum of fuss... she wins your admiration by the simplicity of her effects" and Roger Ebert felt that both Rourke and Dunaway “take their characters as opportunities to stretch as actors, to take changes and do extreme things.” After "Barfly", which remained one of her favorite films, Dunaway tried to be careful about the roles she chose, but was also faced with the reality she had to work to support herself and her child.
In 1988, she appeared in the period drama "The Gamble" but felt that the best part of this experience turned out to be meeting her co-star Matthew Modine. The following year, she produced and starred in an adaptation for television of Olive Ann Burns' historical novel "Cold Sassy Tree". Dunaway co-starred Richard Widmark and Neil Patrick Harris as an enchanting dressmaker who lightens up the lives of a young boy and his grandfather, whom she marries to the town's disapproval. The film aired on TNT to great success and became one of Dunaway's favorite experiences. "What gave "Cold Sassy" its heart were the people who were involved. It was an incredible collaboration, and I treasure the experience as much as the result, of which I am extremely proud." That same year, she agreed to take part in "Wait Until Spring, Bandini" with Joe Mantegna as a favor to Tom Luddy, who had produced "Barfly". Also in 1989, she appeared in the Italian drama "Crystal or Ash, Fire or Wind, as Long as It's Love" as she wanted to work with director Lina Wertmüller. In 1990, she was reunited with Robert Duvall, with whom she had co-starred in "Network", in Volker Schlöndorff's adaptation of the Margaret Atwood novel of the same name, "The Handmaid's Tale". The film did not do well at the box office but Dunaway's performance earned her good reviews. Roger Ebert wrote that "Duvall and Dunaway provide the best moments in the movie, he by showing the unconscious egotism of the male libido, she by showing that in all times and all weathers, some kinds of women will gauge their happiness by the degree to which their family's exterior appearance matches the accepted values of society."

"Double Edge" (1992) by Israeli director, writer and actor Amos Kollek offered her a role she wanted to play, a "New York Times" reporter who has been sent to Jerusalem for three weeks to cover the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. All of these were smaller movies that never manage to draw the attention of a mass audience. The following year, Dunaway accepted a supporting role in the thriller "The Temp", as she felt the project had the potential to be a mainstream hit, and was a chance for her to reconnect with a larger audience.
The film proved to be a critical and commercial failure. Four weeks before its release, Paramount decided to re-shoot the final scene, much to Dunaway's displeasure, as her character was going to be turned into the murderer. "Once again, I could see myself being thrown into playing the extreme —‌ what was initially conceived as a character in the tradition of Diana in "Network" was being turned into a high-gloss female executive/slasher. The new ending wasn't enough to salvage the film, though. By the final scene, it didn't matter who was the killer, the film had been dead for an hour at least." Also in 1993, Dunaway was cast as Johnny Depp's love interest in Emir Kusturica's surrealist comedy-drama "Arizona Dream". The film, in which she played a woman who dreams of building a flying machine, premiered in Europe to great acclaim, and received the Silver Bear —‌ Special Jury Prize at the Berlin International Film Festival. Dunaway was very proud of the film, and believed that her role could bring her career to higher heights than ever. However, Warner Bros. elected to re-edit Kusturica's film, cutting and changing it. Dunaway was dismayed to find that some of her best scenes were left out of the American version. Warner Bros. released the film in United States in 1994 to positive reviews, but little box office.
That same year, Dunaway was cast in the short-lived CBS sitcom, "It Had to Be You". Around that time, she was contacted by NBC who wanted her to take on the role of a female sleuth, more in the vein of "Columbo" than "Murder, She Wrote". As the prospective series was being developed, Dunaway contacted "Columbo" star Peter Falk, wanting his advice on how to approach playing a sleuth character. While discussing the role, Falk told Dunaway about a "Columbo" script that he had written himself. "It's All in the Game" featured a seductive woman who plays a game of cat-and-mouse with Lt. Columbo in the midst of a murder. Falk had written the script some years prior, saying that he could not find the right actress to take on the role. He offered her the role, and Dunaway accepted immediately. The 1993 TV movie proved a success, nominated for several Golden Globe and Emmy Awards. Dunaway was recognized with the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Guest Actress in a Drama Series, saying it was that moment when she felt like she was truly home. "I was overwhelmed by the generosity of spirit my colleagues extended me that night. It was like being wrapped up in a warm embrace. Though this is more often than not a town of grand illusions and transitory friendships, the moment seemed heartfelt, and touched me deeply."

With the prospective detective show not working out, Dunaway became interested in returning to the stage. She auditioned to replace Glenn Close in the musical "Sunset Boulevard", a stage version of 1950 film of the same name. The composer and producer Andrew Lloyd Webber cast Dunaway in the famed role of Norma Desmond, and Dunaway began rehearsing to take over the LA engagement from Close when Close moved the show to Broadway. Tickets went on sale for Dunaway's engagement, but shortly after the rehearsals started, Webber and his associates announced that Dunaway was unable to sing to their desired standards. They announced that when Close finished her engagement, the show would shut down completely. Dunaway filed a lawsuit, claiming that Webber had damaged her reputation with his claims. The case went to court and a settlement was later reached, but Dunaway and the producers have not discussed it.
In 1995, Dunaway reunited with Johnny Depp in the romantic comedy "Don Juan DeMarco", in which she played Marlon Brando's wife. A hit at the box office, the film was praised for its romance and the performances of the three main characters. That same year, Dunaway published "Looking for Gatsby", a memoir she co-wrote with Betsy Sharkey, which earned her great reviews. Mark Harris of "Entertainment Weekly" wrote in his review of the book that "to read her accounts of her Oscar-nominated performances as the taut, sexy, neurotic femmes fatales of "Bonnie and Clyde", "Chinatown", and "Network" is to learn from an expert about the instincts, collaborations, and compromises that go into great film acting."
The following year, Dunaway was awarded a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame and starred in the family comedy "Dunston Checks In", the crime thriller "The Chamber", which reunited her with her "Bonnie and Clyde" co-star Gene Hackman, and the directorial debut of actor Kevin Spacey, "Albino Alligator". Also in 1996, Dunaway returned to the stage, playing famed opera singer Maria Callas in the U.S. national tour of the Tony Award winning play "Master Class" by Terrence McNally. Callas was one of Dunaway's favorite characters she ever played. "That woman changed an art form and not many people can say that. Callas is to opera what Fellini is to cinema." Similarities were made by the press between the career and personalities of Callas and Dunaway as both were seen as perfectionists whose run-ins with directors had them castigated as prima donnas. "I think the play is really about what it takes to do something in life, and it's original in that, because there's not a play I know of that has been written about that. This is about an uncompromising artist and a professional who will stop at almost nothing to serve the art that she loves. She said it over and over again in many of her interviews: "It's not a question of discipline, it's a question of love, of what you do out of the passion for your art." And she's right. She was all about feeling —‌ that's why I love this role so much." The tour was a great success and earned Dunaway rave reviews for her performance, as well as the Sarah Siddons Award.

Her performance as the matron of a wealthy Jewish family in turmoil in the drama "The Twilight of the Golds" (1997) earned her a Screen Actors Guild Award nomination for Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a TV Movie or Miniseries. In 1998, she starred with Angelina Jolie in "Gia", a biographical film about the rise and fall of supermodel Gia Carangi. Playing the small but key role of Carangi's agent, Dunaway was well reviewed and won her third Golden Globe Award, for Best Supporting Actress – Series, Miniseries or Television. The following year, Dunaway appeared in the remake of "The Thomas Crown Affair", and Roger Ebert argued in his review of the film that she “had more electricity in 1968 and still does” compared to actress Rene Russo who was cast in her original role. Also in 1999, Dunaway portrayed Yolande of Aragon in Luc Besson's historical drama "".

In 2000, Dunaway appeared in the James Gray-directed crime film "The Yards" as Charlize Theron’s mother. Although failing to perform at the box office, the film was received with positive reviews. That same year, she turned down the opportunity to play a drug addict in "Requiem for a Dream" and the role went to Ellen Burstyn, who received an Academy Award nomination for her performance. In 2001, Dunaway's role in "Running Mates" earned her a Golden Globe nomination for Best Supporting Actress in a Series, Miniseries or Television Film. In 2002, she played Ian Somerhalder's rich Xanax-popping mother in Roger Avary's adaptation of Bret Easton Ellis' novel, "The Rules of Attraction". She served as a judge on the 2005 reality show "The Starlet", which sought, "American Idol"-style, to find the next young actress with the potential to become a major star. In 2006, Dunaway guest-starred in one episode of the crime drama "" because she was a huge fan of the show. She also appeared on "Touched by an Angel", "Alias" and "Grey's Anatomy". In 2008, Dunaway agreed to star in a low-budget Welsh horror film, "Flick", for a fraction of her usual $1million fee after falling in love with the script. She called the writer and director David Howard personally to accept the part of a one-armed American detective, saying it was "a really original story." The film premiered at the Raindance Film Festival. That same year, she criticized Hollywood’s treatment of older women, saying: "I am furious that they think I'm too old to play the love interest of guys like Jack Nicholson and Clint Eastwood. Why should I play sisters and mothers while guys like Jack and Clint, who are older than me, have on-screen lovers half their age?"

In 2009, Dunaway began shooting a film version of the McNally play "Master Class", starring herself as Maria Callas, Al Pacino (as Aristotle Onassis), Val Kilmer, Alan Cumming, her son Liam Dunaway O'Neill and lyric soprano Danielle de Niese (the latter two as opera students). As film roles became more difficult to find, Dunaway bought the rights to the play after the 1997 tour and announced her intention of writing, directing and starring in the film. The production however was a disaster and financing the project has been one of the many obstacles. "I want to do it my way. I'm not going to sell it out to a studio. You have to raise money. You have to get private investors and it takes a long time to get it right. It takes 10 years. People hear Faye Dunaway and think she has a lot of money, but I don't because I've spent a lot. Not tonnes. I spent what I want to spend on this movie and you have to have skin in this game. You have to take risks." In 2013, she confirmed that she had completed the first half of the film and planned to shoot the rest soon after. However, it was announced in June 2014 that after nearly 20 years of owning the film rights, Dunaway had decided to withdraw from the project.
In 2011, a photo of Dunaway taken by Jerry Schatzberg in 1970 was chosen as the 64th annual Cannes Film Festival poster backdrop. The festival organizers described it as a "Model of sophistication and timeless elegance, it is an embodiment of the cinematic dream that the Festival de Cannes seeks to maintain." During the festival, Dunaway and Schatzberg appeared at a special screening of "Puzzle of a Downfall Child," earning a standing ovation upon their entrance. In 2013, Dunaway was the first recipient of the Leopard Club Award and made a rare personal appearance at the Locarno International Film Festival to accept the award. In 2014, Dunaway was recognized as the guest of honor by the Lumière Film Festival. Organizers praised the "immense contribution she has made to the emergence of the independent American films of the sixties and seventies, and the contribution is of the highest caliber." Her attendance at the festival was described as an "exceptional event." Dunaway received a standing ovation by a crowd of 5,000 and declared in an emotional speech following the tribute she received, "My fans and my friends have supported me in this search for all these years and I thank you from all of my heart and without you I would not be the same Faye Dunaway." Also in 2014, Dunaway had to pull out of a French drama called "Macadam Stories", in which she was going to play the lead, due to health issues, and was replaced by Isabelle Huppert.

In 2016, Dunaway made two rare public appearances at the TCM Classic Film Festival. She hosted a screening of "Network" and also joined in conversation with Ben Mankiewicz for a Q&A session in which she discussed her decades-spanning career. The hour-long interview later aired on TCM as "Faye Dunaway: Live from the TCM Classic Film Festival". Although she stated in a 2013 interview she felt her acting career was "pretty much over," Dunaway told Mankiewicz she had no intention to retire, "We live for work. We live for what we do. I just want to keep working. It's where I'm happiest." That same year, she guest-starred as herself in the season finale of season two of the mockumentary series "Documentary Now!". The episode, titled "Mr. Runner Up: My Life as an Oscar Bridesmaid," was inspired by producer Robert Evans, with whom Dunaway worked on "Chinatown," and the 2002 documentary about his life "The Kid Stays in the Picture". 
In 2017, Dunaway appeared in her first feature film in eight years with the release of "The Bye Bye Man", a horror-thriller that proved to be a commercial success, despite negative reviews, and earned her positive notices. Dunaway then accepted a small role in "The Case for Christ", a Christian drama based on the 1998 book of the same name by Lee Strobel, as she wanted to do a faith film, "I became aware of this genre maybe a year or two ago and I told my agent to look out for a project that I could do because I've been a devout Catholic since the beginning of my career." Her final release of 2017 was "Inconceivable", a psychological thriller in which she starred alongside Nicolas Cage and Gina Gershon. Dunaway broke her leg a few days before filming but director Jonathan Baker refused to recast the role, as it had been written specifically for her, and rewrote her part so that she would be able to perform sitting down. The critic Frank Scheck of "The Hollywood Reporter" found "distressing that Dunaway can’t find more dignified projects at this point in her estimable career."

Also in 2017, Dunaway reunited with her "Bonnie and Clyde" co-star Warren Beatty at the 89th Academy Awards, in celebration of the film's 50th anniversary. After being introduced by Jimmy Kimmel, they were given a standing ovation as they walked out onto the stage to present the Best Picture Award. They were given the wrong envelope and Dunaway incorrectly announced "La La Land" as Best Picture, instead of the actual winner, "Moonlight". This became a social media sensation, trending all over the world. Dunaway was left "completely stunned" when Oscars crew members came on stage to explain that there had been a mistake and later said she felt "very guilty" about the incident, describing it as "one of the worst moments I've ever had". That same year, Dunaway was honored at the Dallas International Film Festival where she was presented with the Dallas Star Award.

Dunaway is regarded as one of the greatest and most beautiful actresses of her generation, as well as a powerful emblem of the New Hollywood. Joan Crawford praised Dunaway in her 1971 book, "My Way of Life". "Of all the actresses, to me, only Faye Dunaway has the talent and the class and the courage it takes to make a real star." Director John Huston, who played Dunaway's father in "Chinatown", stated in a 1985 interview that he found her to be "quite extraordinary." Robert Evans, who produced "Chinatown", also described her as "extraordinary" and affirmed that "no one could've played her part as well." Stephen Rebello of "Movieline" wrote in a 2002 article, "Though fiercely modern, an ideal female analog for screen machos like Steve McQueen and the young Jack Nicholson, she also radiated the stuff vintage movie stars are made of. Any actress today would be lucky to have a fraction of her films on her resume." 

Cannes Film Festival artistic director Thierry Fremaux said, "She has one of the most wonderful filmographies of any actress. Look at her movies from the '70s for example — she only made good choices. She's had an incredible career." Through her career, Dunaway worked with many of the 20th century's greatest directors—Elia Kazan, Sidney Lumet, Arthur Penn, Roman Polanski, Sydney Pollack and Emir Kusturica among them, and several of the films she starred in became classics. In 1998, the American Film Institute ranked "Bonnie and Clyde", "Chinatown" and "Network" on their list of the 100 best American movies ever made. Her roles as Bonnie Parker and Joan Crawford were respectively named 32nd and 41st on the AFI's list of the fifty greatest screen characters in the villain category. Elizabeth Snead wrote in her review for "USA Today" of Dunaway's memoirs that she was "the epitome of a modern, mature, sexy woman" and Mark Harris of "Entertainment Weekly" felt that "Faye Dunaway is a rarity in the land of stars (and star bios) — a tough, smart, committed pro." In 1994, Dunaway was ranked 27th by "People Magazine" on a list of the 50 most beautiful people and in 1997 she was ranked 65th by "Empire Magazine" on a list of the 100 top stars in film history.
Famously demanding, with an attention to detail that sometimes drove costars and directors mad, Dunaway believed she was often mistaken for being as cold and calculating as some of the women she portrayed. Her clashes with Roman Polanski on the set of "Chinatown" earned her a reputation for being difficult to work with. Upon the release of the film, Polanski told a reporter for "Rolling Stone" that he considered Dunaway "a gigantic pain in the ass,” but added that he had "never known an actress to take work as seriously as she does. I tell you, she is a maniac.” Bette Davis described Dunaway as the worst person she had ever worked with in an interview with Johnny Carson in 1988, calling her "totally impossible", "uncooperative', and "very unprofessional". Dunaway denied Davis' claims in her autobiography, writing "Watching her, all I could think of was that she seemed like someone caught in a death throe, a final scream against a fate over which no one has control. I was just the target of her blind rage at the one sin Hollywood never forgives in its leading ladies growing old." 

In his 1996 book "Making Movies", Sidney Lumet slammed Dunaway's reputation for being difficult as "totally untrue" and called her a "selfless, devoted and wonderful actress." Director Elia Kazan described Dunaway as "a supremely endowed, hungry, curious, bright young talent" and added "Faye is a brilliant actress and a shy, highly-strung woman. She is intelligent and she is strong-willed." Like Lumet, Kazan felt she was not difficult but a perfectionist who was never satisfied. "The artist is rarely, if ever, satisfied. The artist is frequently grateful and intermittently amazed, but he or she is never satisfied. That Faye is unlikely to be satisfied with her efforts—or those with whom she works—is not a caprice; it is not the willful misbehavior of a spoiled actress: This is how artists operate." Johnny Depp, who co-starred with Dunaway in "Arizona Dream" and "Don Juan deMarco", called her a misunderstood artist. "She’s just uncompromising as an actress and I think that’s a positive thing." Maria Elena Fernandez of "The Los Angeles Times" wrote in a 2005 article about Dunaway that "in her case, the behavior many call 'difficult' seems clearly linked more to passions than to ego." In her autobiography "Looking for Gatsby", Dunaway confronted this reputation and described herself as a "perfectionist": 

In 1962, Dunaway started a romance with stand-up comedian Lenny Bruce that lasted for a year. She was engaged to photographer Jerry Schatzberg from 1967 to 1968. The two remained friends and Dunaway later starred in his first film as a director, "Puzzle of a Downfall Child" (1970). During the filming of "A Place for Lovers" (1968), Dunaway fell in love with her co-star Marcello Mastroianni. The couple had a two-year-live-in relationship. Dunaway wanted to marry and have children, but Mastroianni, a married man, could not bear to hurt his wife and refused, despite protests from his teenage daughter Barbara and his close friend Federico Fellini. Dunaway decided to leave him and told a reporter at the time that she "gave too much. I gave things I have to save for my work". She later recalled in her autobiography:

Mastroianni later told a reporter for "People" in 1987 that he never got over his relationship with Dunaway. "She was the woman I loved the most", he said. "I'll always be sorry to have lost her. I was whole with her for the first time in my life."

In 1974, Dunaway married Peter Wolf, the lead singer of the rock group The J. Geils Band. Their career commitments caused frequent separations and the two divorced in 1979. She met her second husband, the British photographer Terry O'Neill, when he was assigned by "People" magazine to take pictures of Peter Wolf and of her in 1977. They married in 1983 and Dunaway credited O'Neill with being "the one person responsible for helping me grow up to womanhood and a healthy sense of myself". Their child, Liam Dunaway O'Neill, was born in 1980. In 2003, despite Dunaway's earlier indications that she had given birth to Liam, Terry O'Neill revealed that their son was adopted. 

Dunaway is a devout Roman Catholic and has said that she attends morning Mass regularly. In a rare interview for "Harper's Bazaar" in 2016, Dunaway said she felt "it's important to have a partner, probably" but she described herself as a "loner" and added, "I kind of like to be alone and do my work and, you know, be focused on my own things."

Select filmography:

Select theatre roles:



</doc>
<doc id="84047" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84047" title="Jessica Tandy">
Jessica Tandy

Jessica Tandy (born Jessie Alice Tandy; 7 June 1909 – 11 September 1994) was a British stage and film actress. She appeared in over 100 stage productions and had more than 60 roles in film and TV.

Born in London to Jessie Helen Horspool and commercial traveller Harry Tandy, she was only 18 when she made her professional debut on the London stage in 1927. During the 1930s, she appeared in a large number of plays in London's West End, playing roles such as Ophelia (opposite John Gielgud's legendary Hamlet) and Katherine (opposite Laurence Olivier's Henry V). 

During this period, she also worked in a couple of British films. Following the end of her marriage to the British actor Jack Hawkins, she moved to New York in 1940, where she met Canadian actor Hume Cronyn. He became her second husband and frequent partner on stage and screen.

She received the Tony Award for best performance by a Leading Actress in A Play for her performance as Blanche Dubois in the original Broadway production of "A Streetcar Named Desire" in 1948. Tandy shared the prize with Katharine Cornell (who won for the female lead in "Antony and Cleopatra") and Judith Anderson (for the latter's portrayal of Medea) in a three-way tie for the award. Over the following three decades, her career continued sporadically and included a supporting role in Alfred Hitchcock's horror film, "The Birds" (1963), and a Tony Award-winning performance in "The Gin Game" (1977, playing in the two-hander play opposite Hume Cronyn). Along with Cronyn, she was a member of the original acting company of the Guthrie Theater.

In the mid-1980s she had a career revival. She appeared with Cronyn in the Broadway production of "Foxfire" in 1983 and its television adaptation four years later, winning both a Tony Award and an Emmy Award for her portrayal of Annie Nations. During these years, she appeared in films such as "Cocoon" (1985), also with Cronyn.

She became the oldest actress to receive the Academy Award for Best Actress for her role in "Driving Miss Daisy" (1989), for which she also won a BAFTA and a Golden Globe, and was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress for "Fried Green Tomatoes" (1991). At the height of her success, she was named as one of "People's" "50 Most Beautiful People". She was diagnosed with ovarian cancer in 1990, and continued working until shortly before her death.

The youngest of three siblings, Tandy was born in Geldeston Road in Hackney, London. Her father, Harry Tandy, was a travelling salesman for a rope manufacturer. Her mother, Jessie Helen Horspool was the head of a school for mentally handicapped children who was from a large fenland family in Wisbech, Cambs. 

Her father died when Tandy was 12, and her mother subsequently taught evening courses to earn an income. Her brother Edward was later a prisoner of war of the Japanese in the Far East. Tandy was educated at Dame Alice Owen's School in Islington. 

Tandy began her career at the age of 18 in London, establishing herself with performances opposite such actors as Laurence Olivier and John Gielgud. She entered films in Britain, but after her marriage to Jack Hawkins failed, she moved to the United States hoping to find better roles. During her time as a leading actress on the stage in London she often had to fight for roles over her two rivals, Peggy Ashcroft and Celia Johnson. In 1942, she married Hume Cronyn and over the following years played supporting roles in several Hollywood films. Tandy became a naturalized citizen of the United States in 1952.

Like so many stage actors, Tandy had a hand in radio, as well. Among other programs, she was a regular on "Mandrake the Magician" (as Princess Nada), and then with husband Hume Cronyn in "The Marriage" which ran on radio from 1953-54, and then segued onto television.

She made her American film debut in "The Seventh Cross" (1944). The Hollywood studio system did not know what to do with Tandy. Failing to gain leading roles, she was regulated to supporting appearances in "The Valley of Decision" (1945), "The Green Years" (1946, as Cronyn's daughter), "Dragonwyck" (1946) starring Gene Tierney and Vincent Price and "Forever Amber" (1947). Over the next three decades, her film career continued sporadically while she found better roles on the stage. Her roles during this time included "" (1951) opposite James Mason, "The Light in the Forest" (1958), and a role as a domineering mother in Alfred Hitchcock's film, "The Birds" (1963).

On Broadway, she won a Tony Award for her performance as Blanche Dubois in the original Broadway production of "A Streetcar Named Desire" in 1948. After this (she lost the film role to actress Vivien Leigh), she concentrated on the stage. In 1977, she earned her second Tony Award, for her performance (with Cronyn) in "The Gin Game" and her third Tony in 1982 for her performance, again with Cronyn, in Foxfire.

The beginning of the 1980s saw a resurgence in her film career, with character roles in "The World According to Garp", "Best Friends", "Still of the Night" (all 1982) and "The Bostonians" (1984). She and Cronyn were now working together more regularly on stage and television, including the films "Cocoon" (1985), "*batteries not included" (1987) and "" (1988) and the Emmy Award winning television film "Foxfire" (1987, recreating her Tony winning Broadway role). 

However, it was her colourful performance in "Driving Miss Daisy" (1989), as an aging, stubborn Southern-Jewish matron, that earned her an Oscar.

She received a Best Supporting Actress nomination for her work in the grassroots hit "Fried Green Tomatoes" (1991), and co-starred in "The Story Lady" (1991 telefilm, with daughter Tandy Cronyn), "Used People" (1992, as Shirley MacLaine's mother), television film "To Dance with the White Dog" (1993, with Cronyn), "Nobody's Fool" (1994), and "Camilla" (also 1994, with Cronyn). "Camilla" proved to be her last performance, at the age of 84.

Tandy was chosen by People magazine as one of the 50 Most Beautiful People in the world in 1990.


Tandy's first marriage to English actor Jack Hawkins in 1932, produced one daughter, Susan Hawkins (born 1934). The couple divorced in 1940. Tandy married her second husband, Canadian actor Hume Cronyn, in 1942; the marriage lasted until her death in 1994. They had two children, daughter Tandy Cronyn (an actress who would co-star with her mother in the NBC telefilm "The Story Lady"), and son Christopher Cronyn.

Prior to moving to Connecticut, she lived with Cronyn for many years in nearby Pound Ridge, New York, and they remained together until her death in 1994. In 1990, she was diagnosed with ovarian cancer and fought it for the next four years. Tandy also suffered from angina and glaucoma. Despite all this and her advancing age, she continued working. She died at home on 11 September 1994 in Easton, Connecticut, at age 85.

<nowiki>*</nowiki>Re-issued on DVD as "The Christmas Story Lady"



</doc>
<doc id="147368" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=147368" title="Shirley MacLaine">
Shirley MacLaine

Shirley MacLaine (née MacLean Beaty; born April 24, 1934) is an American film, television and theater actress, singer, dancer, activist and author. An Academy Award winner, MacLaine received the 40th AFI Life Achievement Award from the American Film Institute in 2012, and received the Kennedy Center Honors for her lifetime contributions to American culture through the performing arts in 2013. She is known for her New Age beliefs, and has an interest in spirituality and reincarnation. She has written a series of autobiographical works that describe these beliefs, document her world travels, and describe her Hollywood career.

A six-time Academy Award nominee, MacLaine received a nomination for Best Documentary Feature for "" (1975), and Best Actress nominations for "Some Came Running" (1958), "The Apartment" (1960), "Irma la Douce" (1963), and "The Turning Point" (1977), before winning Best Actress for "Terms of Endearment" (1983). She twice won the BAFTA Award for Best Foreign Actress, for "Ask Any Girl" (1959), and "The Apartment" (1960); and won an Emmy Award for Outstanding Comedy-Variety or Music Special for the 1976 TV special, "Gypsy In My Soul". She has also won five competitive Golden Globe Awards and received the Golden Globe Cecil B. DeMille Award at the 1998 ceremony.

Named after actress Shirley Temple (who was six years old at the time), Shirley MacLean Beaty was born on April 24, 1934, in Richmond, Virginia. Her father, Ira Owens Beaty, was a professor of psychology, public school administrator, and real estate agent, and her mother, Kathlyn Corinne (née MacLean), was a drama teacher, originally from Wolfville, Nova Scotia, Canada. MacLaine's younger brother is the actor, writer and director Warren Beatty; he changed the spelling of his surname when he became an actor. Their parents raised them as Baptists. Her uncle (her mother's brother-in-law) was A. A. MacLeod, a Communist member of the Ontario legislature in the 1940s. While MacLaine was still a child, Ira Beaty moved his family from Richmond to Norfolk, and then to Arlington and Waverly, eventually taking a position at Arlington's Thomas Jefferson Junior High School. MacLaine played baseball in an all-boys team, holding the record for most home runs, which earned her the nickname "Powerhouse". During the 1950s, the family resided in the Dominion Hills section of Arlington.

As a toddler she had weak ankles and would fall over with the slightest misstep, so her mother decided to enroll her in ballet class at the Washington School of Ballet at the age of three. This was the beginning of her interest in performing. Strongly motivated by ballet, she never missed a class. In classical romantic pieces like "Romeo and Juliet" and "The Sleeping Beauty", she always played the boys' roles due to being the tallest in the group and the absence of males in the class. Eventually she had a substantial female role as the fairy godmother in "Cinderella"; while warming up backstage, she broke her ankle, but then tightened the ribbons on her toe shoes and proceeded to dance the role all the way through before calling for an ambulance. Ultimately she decided against making a career of professional ballet because she had grown too tall and was unable to acquire perfect technique. She explained that she didn't have the ideal body type, lacking the requisite "beautifully constructed feet" of high arches, high insteps and a flexible ankle. Also slowly realizing ballet's propensity to be too all-consuming, and ultimately limiting, she moved on to other forms of dancing, acting and musical theater.

She attended Washington-Lee High School, where she was on the cheerleading squad and acted in school theatrical productions. The summer before her senior year, she went to New York City to try acting on Broadway, and had some success. After she graduated, she returned and within a year became an understudy to actress Carol Haney in "The Pajama Game"; in May 1954 Haney injured her ankle during a Wednesday matinee, and MacLaine replaced her. A few months after, with Haney still injured, film producer Hal B. Wallis saw MacLaine's performance, and signed her to work for Paramount Pictures.

Maclaine later sued Wallis over a contractual dispute, a suit that has been credited with ending the old-style studio star system of actor management.

In 1966, Maclaine sued Twentieth Century-Fox for breach of contract when the studio reneged on its agreement to star Maclaine in a film version of the musical "Bloomer Girl", to be filmed in Hollywood, offering her instead the female dramatic lead in a Western to be filmed in Australia. The case was decided in Maclaine's favor, and affirmed on appeal by the California Supreme Court in 1970; the case is often cited in law-school textbooks as a major example of employment-contract law.

MacLaine made her film debut in Alfred Hitchcock's "The Trouble with Harry" (1955), for which she won the Golden Globe Award for New Star of the Year – Actress. This was quickly followed by her role in the Martin and Lewis film "Artists and Models" (also 1955). Soon afterwards, she had a role in "Around the World in 80 Days" (1956). This was followed by "Hot Spell" and a leading role in "Some Came Running" (both 1958); for the latter film she gained her first Academy Award nomination and a Golden Globe nomination. Her second Oscar nomination came two years later for "The Apartment" (1960), starring with Jack Lemmon. The film won five Oscars, including Best Director for Billy Wilder. She later said, "I thought I would win for "The Apartment", but then Elizabeth Taylor had a tracheotomy." She starred in "The Children's Hour" (1961) also starring Audrey Hepburn and James Garner, based on the play by Lillian Hellman and directed by William Wyler. She was again nominated, this time for "Irma la Douce" (1963), which reunited her with Wilder and Lemmon. Don Siegel, her director on "Two Mules for Sister Sara" (1970) said of her: "It's hard to feel any great warmth to her. She's too unfeminine and has too much balls. She's very, very hard." At the peak of her success, she replaced Marilyn Monroe in "Irma la Douce" and "What a Way to Go!" (1964). Other films from this period include "Gambit" (1966), with Michael Caine, and the film version of the musical "Sweet Charity" (1968), based on the script for Fellini's "Nights of Cabiria" released a decade earlier.
MacLaine's documentary film "" (1975), co-directed with Claudia Weill, concentrates on the experiences of women in China. It was nominated for the year's Documentary Feature Oscar. In 1976 MacLaine appeared in a series of concerts at the London Palladium and New York's Palace Theatre. The latter of these was released as the acclaimed live album "Shirley MacLaine Live at the Palace". Co-starring with Anne Bancroft in "The Turning Point" (1977), MacLaine portrayed a retired ballerina much like herself; she was nominated for an Oscar as the Best Actress in a Leading Role. In 1978, she was awarded the Women in Film Crystal Award for outstanding women who, through their endurance and the excellence of their work, have helped to expand the role of women within the entertainment industry. In "Being There" (1979), she appeared with Peter Sellers. In a short-lived MacLaine television sitcom, "Shirley's World" (1971–72), co-produced by Sheldon Leonard and ITC and shot in the United Kingdom, she was cast as a photojournalist.

MacLaine starred in "A Change of Seasons" (1980) alongside Anthony Hopkins, and won the Best Actress in a Leading Role Oscar for "Terms of Endearment" (1983), playing Debra Winger's mother. She won a Golden Globe for Best Actress (Drama) for "Madame Sousatzka" (1988).

She has continued to star in major films, such as "Steel Magnolias" with Sally Field, Julia Roberts and other stars. In 2000 she made her feature-film directorial debut and starred in "Bruno", which was released to video as "The Dress Code". MacLaine has starred in "Postcards from the Edge" (1990) with Meryl Streep, playing a fictionalized version of Debbie Reynolds from a screenplay by Reynolds's daughter, Carrie Fisher; "Used People" (1992) with Jessica Tandy and Kathy Bates; "Guarding Tess" (1994) with Nicolas Cage; "Mrs. Winterbourne" (1996), with Ricki Lake and Brendan Fraser; "Rumor Has It…" (2005) with Kevin Costner and Jennifer Aniston; "In Her Shoes" (also 2005) with Cameron Diaz and Toni Collette; and "Closing the Ring" (2007) directed by Richard Attenborough and starring Christopher Plummer.

MacLaine has also appeared in numerous television projects including an autobiographical miniseries based upon the book "Out on a Limb"; "The Salem Witch Trials"; "These Old Broads" written by Carrie Fisher and co-starring Elizabeth Taylor, Debbie Reynolds, and Joan Collins; and "Coco", a Lifetime production based on the life of Coco Chanel. She appeared in the third and fourth seasons of the British drama "Downton Abbey" as Martha Levinson, mother to Cora, Countess of Grantham (played by Elizabeth McGovern) and Harold Levinson (played by Paul Giamatti) in 2012–2013.

In 2016 MacLaine starred in "Wild Oats" with Jessica Lange. On February 2016, it was announced that MacLaine will star in the live-action family film "A Little Mermaid", based on the Hans Christian Andersen fairytale, to be produced by MVP Studios.

MacLaine was married to businessman Steve Parker from 1954 until their divorce in 1982; they have a daughter, Sachi. In April 2011, while promoting her new book, "I'm Over All That", she revealed to Oprah Winfrey that she had had an open relationship with her husband. MacLaine also told Winfrey that she often fell for the leading men she worked with, with the exceptions of Jack Lemmon ("The Apartment") and Jack Nicholson ("Terms of Endearment").

MacLaine has also gotten into feuds with such notable co-stars as Anthony Hopkins ("A Change of Seasons"), who said that "she was the most obnoxious actress I have ever worked with," and Debra Winger ("Terms of Endearment").

MacLaine has claimed that, in a previous life in Atlantis, she was the brother to a 35,000-year-old spirit named Ramtha channeled by American mystic teacher and author J. Z. Knight.

She has a strong interest in spirituality and metaphysics, the central theme of some of her best-selling books including "Out on a Limb" and "Dancing in the Light". She has undertaken such forms of spiritual exploration as walking the Way of St. James, working with Chris Griscom, and practicing Transcendental Meditation.

Her well-known interest in New Age spirituality has also made its way into several of her films. In Albert Brooks's romantic comedy "Defending Your Life" (1991), the recently deceased lead characters, played by Brooks and Meryl Streep, are astonished to find MacLaine introducing their past lives in the "Past Lives Pavilion". In "Postcards from the Edge" (1990), MacLaine sings a version of "I'm Still Here", with customized lyrics created for her by composer Stephen Sondheim. One of the lyrics was changed to "I'm feeling transcendental – am I here?" In the television movie "These Old Broads", MacLaine's character is a devotee of New Age spirituality.

She has an interest in UFOs, and gave numerous interviews on CNN, NBC and Fox news channels on the subject during 2007–08. In her book "Sage-ing While Age-ing" (2007), she described alien encounters and witnessing a Washington, D.C. UFO incident in the 1950s. In the April 2011 edition of the Oprah show MacLaine stated that she and her neighbor observed numerous UFO incidents at her New Mexico ranch for extended periods of time.

MacLaine is godmother to the daughter of former Democratic U.S. Representative Dennis Kucinich.

Along with her brother, Warren Beatty, MacLaine used her celebrity status in instrumental roles as a fundraiser and organizer for George McGovern's campaign for president in 1972. That year, she authored the book "McGovern: The Man and His Beliefs".

On February 7, 2013, Penguin Group USA published Sachi Parker's autobiography "Lucky Me: My Life With – and Without – My Mom, Shirley MacLaine". MacLaine has called the book "virtually all fiction".

In 2015, she sparked criticism for her comments on Jews, Christians, and Stephen Hawking. In particular she claimed that victims of the Nazi Holocaust were experiencing the results of their own karma, and suggested that Hawking subconsciously caused himself to develop ALS as a means to focus better on physics.

MacLaine was awarded the Kennedy Center Honors for lifetime contributions to American culture through the performing arts in December 2013. She also has a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame at 1617 Vine Street and in 1999 was awarded the Honorary Golden Bear at the 49th Berlin International Film Festival, and her likeness has been sculpted in wax for Madame Tussauds Las Vegas.

In 2011, the government of France made her a Chevalier de la Legion d'honneur.

In the 2017 Oscars Award Show, she presented the best Foreign Language Film of the year alongside Charlize Theron, and was featured in a segment about her work in "The Apartment".






</doc>
<doc id="183753" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=183753" title="Jane Wyman">
Jane Wyman

Jane Wyman (born Sarah Jane Mayfield; January 5, 1917 – September 10, 2007) was an American actress, singer, dancer and philanthropist whose career spanned seven decades. She was also the first wife of actor Ronald Reagan, the 40th President of the United States. They married in 1940 and divorced in 1949.

Wyman's professional career began at age 16 in 1932 when she signed with Warner Bros. Wyman followed common practice at the time when she added three years to her age. A popular contract player, she frequently played the leading lady, her roles including starring alongside William Hopper in "Public Wedding" (1937), Ronald Reagan and Eddie Albert in "Brother Rat" (1938) and its sequel "Brother Rat and a Baby" (1940), Dennis Morgan in "Bad Men of Missouri" (1941), Marlene Dietrich in "Stage Fright" (1950), and Sterling Hayden in "So Big" (1953). She was also featured opposite Rock Hudson in "Magnificent Obsession" (1954) and "All That Heaven Allows" (1955), both directed by Douglas Sirk. She received an Academy Award for Best Actress for her performance in "Johnny Belinda" (1948), and was a three-time winner of a Golden Globe. She achieved continuing success in the television soap opera "Falcon Crest" (1981–1990), in which Wyman played the lead role of villainous matriarch Angela Channing.

Jane Wyman was born Sarah Jane Mayfield on January 5, 1917 in St Joseph, Missouri, to Gladys Hope (née Christian; 1895 – 1960) and Manning Jeffries Mayfield (1895 – 1922). Her father was a meal company laborer and her mother was a doctor's stenographer and office assistant. Wyman was the only child of this union and had no biological siblings, despite some erroneous bios saying she was the youngest of 3 children. This may be in reference to her foster parents' children.

Wyman's biological parents were married in March 1916 in Jackson County, Missouri, and Wyman was born in January 1917. The 1920 census showed her to be the only child from the marriage, and aged three years old on January 15, 1920. The Mayfields divorced the following year.

For many years, Wyman's birthdate was widely reported to be January 4, 1914, but research by biographers and genealogists indicated that she was actually born 3 years later. The most likely reason for the 1914 year of birth is that she added to her age in order to gain employment doing odd jobs and working as an actress, even though she was still a minor. She may have moved her birthday back by one day to January 4 so as to share the same birthday as her daughter, Maureen (January 4, 1941 – August 8, 2001). The 1920 census, though, has her at three and living in Philadelphia. After Wyman's death, a release posted on her official website confirmed these details.
In October 1921, her mother filed for divorce, and her father died unexpectedly the following year at age 27. After her father's death, her mother moved to Cleveland, Ohio, leaving her to be reared by foster parents, Emma (née Reiss; 1866 – 1951) and Richard D. Fulks (1862 – 1928), the chief of detectives in Saint Joseph. She took their surname unofficially, including in her school records and on her first marriage certificate.

Her unsettled family life resulted in few pleasurable memories. Wyman later said, "I was raised with such strict discipline that it was years before I could reason myself out of the bitterness I brought from my childhood." In 1928, aged 11, she moved to southern California with her foster mother. In 1930, the two moved back to Missouri, where Sarah Jane attended Lafayette High School in Saint Joseph. That same year, she began a radio singing career, calling herself "Jane Durrell" and adding years to her birthdate to work legally, as she would have been underaged.

After dropping out of Lafayette in 1932 at age 15, she returned to Hollywood, taking on odd jobs as a manicurist and a switchboard operator, before obtaining small parts in such films as "The Kid from Spain" (as a "Goldwyn Girl"; 1932), "My Man Godfrey" (1936), and "Cain and Mabel" (1936). She signed a contract with Warner Brothers in 1936. By the time she starred in "Public Wedding" in 1937, she was already divorced from first husband Ernest Wyman. However, she would retain use of his surname for the remainder of her career.

In 1939, Wyman starred in "Torchy Plays With Dynamite". In 1941, she appeared in "You're in the Army Now", in which she and Regis Toomey had the longest screen kiss in cinema history: 3 minutes and 5 seconds.

Wyman finally gained critical notice in the film noir "The Lost Weekend" (1945). She was nominated for the 1946 Academy Award for Best Actress for "The Yearling" (1946), and won two years later for her role as a deaf-mute rape victim in "Johnny Belinda" (1948). She was the first person in the sound era to win an acting Oscar without speaking a line of dialogue. In an amusing acceptance speech, perhaps poking fun at some of her long-winded counterparts, Wyman took her statue and said only, "I accept this, very gratefully, for keeping my mouth shut once. I think I'll do it again." The Oscar win gave her the ability to choose higher-profile roles, although she still showed a liking for musical comedy. She worked with such directors as Alfred Hitchcock on "Stage Fright" (1950), Frank Capra on "Here Comes the Groom" (1951), and Michael Curtiz on "The Story of Will Rogers" (1952). She starred in "The Glass Menagerie" (1950), "Just for You" (1952), "Let's Do It Again" (1953), "The Blue Veil" (1951) (another Oscar nomination), the remake of Edna Ferber's "So Big" (1953), "Magnificent Obsession" (1954) (Oscar nomination), "Lucy Gallant" (1955), "All That Heaven Allows" (1955), and "Miracle in the Rain" (1956). She replaced the ailing Gene Tierney in "Holiday for Lovers" (1959), and next appeared in "Pollyanna" (1960), "Bon Voyage!" (1962), and her final big screen movie, "How to Commit Marriage" (1969). 

Her first guest-starring television role was on a 1955 episode of "General Electric Theater", a show hosted by her former husband Ronald Reagan. This appearance led to roles on "Summer Playhouse", "Lux Playhouse", "Westinghouse Desilu Playhouse", "Checkmate", "The Investigators", and "Wagon Train". She guest-starred in 1959 on "The Ford Show, Starring Tennessee Ernie Ford" on NBC. She was hostess of "The Bell Telephone Hour" and "Bob Hope Presents The Chrysler Theatre". She had telling roles in both "The Sixth Sense" and "Insight", among other programs. 

She hosted an anthology television series, "Jane Wyman Presents the Fireside Theater", for which she was nominated for an Emmy Award in 1957. The ratings steadily declined, however, and the show ended after three seasons. She was later cast in two unsold pilots during the 1960s and 1970s. After those pilots were not picked up, Wyman went into semi-retirement and remained there for most of the 1970s, although she did make guest appearances on "Charlie's Angels" and "The Love Boat".

In the spring of 1981 (a few months after her ex-husband became the president), Wyman's career enjoyed a resurgence when she was cast as the scheming Californian vintner and matriarch Angela Channing in "The Vintage Years", which was retooled as the primetime soap opera "Falcon Crest". The series, which ran from December 1981 to May 1990, was created by Earl Hamner, who had created "The Waltons" a decade earlier. Also starring on the show was an already established character actress, Susan Sullivan, as Angela's niece-in-law, Maggie Gioberti, and the relatively unknown actor Lorenzo Lamas as Angela's irresponsible grandson, Lance Cumson. The on- and off-screen chemistry between Wyman and Lamas helped fuel the series' success. In its first season, "Falcon Crest" was a ratings hit, behind other 1980s prime-time soap operas, such as "Dallas" and "Knots Landing", but initially ahead of rival "Dynasty". Cesar Romero appeared from 1985 to 1987 on "Falcon Crest" as the romantic interest of Angela Channing. 

For her role as Angela Channing, Wyman was nominated for a "Soap Opera Digest" Award five times (for Outstanding Actress in a Leading Role and for Outstanding Villainess: Prime Time Serial), and was also nominated for a Golden Globe award in 1983 and 1984. Her 1984 Golden Globe nomination resulted in a win for Wyman, who took home the award for Best Performance By an Actress in a TV Series. Later in the show's run, Wyman suffered several health problems. In 1986, she had abdominal surgery which caused her to miss two episodes (her character simply "disappeared" under mysterious circumstances). In 1988, she missed another episode due to ill health and was told by her doctors to avoid work. However, she wanted to continue working, and she completed the rest of the 1988–1989 season while her health continued to deteriorate. Months later in 1989, Wyman collapsed on the set and was hospitalized due to problems with diabetes and a liver ailment. Her doctors told her that she should end her acting career. Wyman was absent for most of the ninth and final season of "Falcon Crest" in 1989–1990 (her character was written out of the series by making her comatose in a hospital bed following an attempted murder).

Against her doctor's advice, she returned for the final three episodes in 1990, even writing a soliloquy for the series finale. Wyman ultimately appeared in almost every episode until the beginning of the ninth and final season, for a total of 208 of the show's 227 episodes. After "Falcon Crest", Wyman acted only once more, playing Jane Seymour's screen mother in a 1993 episode of "Dr. Quinn, Medicine Woman". Following this, she retired from acting permanently. Wyman had starred in 83 movies and two successful TV series, and was nominated for an Academy Award four times, winning once.

Wyman married five times and had four husbands.

Wyman married salesman Ernest Eugene Wyman (1906 – 1970) in Los Angeles, California on April 8, 1933. Wyman recorded her name as 'Jane Fulks' on the wedding certificate. She also listed foster parents Emma and Richard Fulks as her parents. In keeping with the tendency of making herself older than she really was, she gave her age as 19 on the document. Truthfully, she had turned 16 just 3 months prior. The couple would divorce after 2 years. Wyman kept her first husband's surname professionally for the remainder of her life.

Wyman married Myron Martin Futterman (1900 – 1965), a dress manufacturer, in New Orleans on June 29, 1937. As Wyman wanted children but Futterman did not, they separated after only three months of marriage and divorced on December 5, 1938.

In 1938, Wyman co-starred with Ronald Reagan in "Brother Rat" (1938), and its sequel "Brother Rat and a Baby" (1940). They were engaged at the Chicago Theatre, and married on January 26, 1940, at the Wee Kirk o' the Heather Church, Glendale, California. She and Reagan had three children; Maureen Elizabeth Reagan (1941 – 2001), their adopted son Michael Edward Reagan (born March 18, 1945), and Christine Reagan (born prematurely on June 26, 1947, and died later the same day). This event irreparably tarnished their marriage. Wyman, who was a registered Republican, stated that their break-up was due to a difference in politics (Ronald Reagan was still a Democrat at the time). She filed for divorce in 1948; the divorce was finalized in 1949. In 1981, Ronald Reagan became the first person to assume the nation's highest office as a divorced man. This made Wyman the first former wife of a United States president who was still living at the time that her former husband became president. Although she remained silent during Reagan's political career, she told a newspaper interviewer in 1968 that this was not because she was bitter or because she did not agree with him politically: 

In spite of her divorce and according to her former personal assistant, she still voted for her former husband in the 1980 and 1984 presidential elections.

Following her divorce from Reagan, Wyman married German-American Hollywood music director and composer Frederick M. "Fred" Karger (1916 – 1979) on November 1, 1952, at El Montecito Presbyterian Church, Santa Barbara. They separated on November 7, 1954, and were granted an interlocutory divorce decree on December 7, 1954; the divorce was finalized on December 30, 1955. They remarried on March 11, 1961, and Karger divorced her again on March 9, 1965. According to "The New York Times" report of the divorce, the bandleader charged that the actress "had walked out on him." Wyman had a stepdaughter, Terry, from Karger's first marriage to Patti Sacks.

Wyman, who had converted to Catholicism in 1953, never remarried. She was a member of the Good Shepherd Parish and the Catholic Motion Picture Guild in Beverly Hills, California.

After "Falcon Crest" ended, Wyman made a guest appearance on the CBS series "Dr. Quinn, Medicine Woman" and then completely retired from acting, spending her retirement painting and entertaining friends. Wyman was a recluse and made only a few public appearances in her last years in part due to suffering from diabetes and arthritis. She did attend her daughter's funeral in 2001 after Maureen died of melanoma. (Ronald Reagan was unable to attend due to his Alzheimer's disease.) She also attended the funeral of her long-time friend Loretta Young in 2000. Wyman broke her silence about her former husband upon his death in 2004, issuing an official statement that read, "America has lost a great president and a great, kind, and gentle man."

Wyman died at the age of 90 at her Rancho Mirage home on September 10, 2007. Wyman's son, Michael Reagan, released a statement saying: 

Wyman reportedly died in her sleep of natural causes. A member of the Dominican Order (as a lay tertiary) of the Roman Catholic Church, she was buried in a nun's habit. She was interred at Forest Lawn Mortuary and Memorial Park in Cathedral City, California.

For several years, film exhibitors voted Wyman as among the most popular stars in the country:

The Martin and Lewis Show Jane Wyman November 30, 1951

Wyman has two stars on the Hollywood Walk of Fame; one for motion pictures at 6607 Hollywood Boulevard and one for television at 1620 Vine Street.



</doc>
<doc id="187098" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=187098" title="Shirley Booth">
Shirley Booth

Shirley Booth (August 30, 1898October 16, 1992) was an American stage, film, radio and television actress.

Primarily a theater actress, Booth began her career on Broadway in 1925. Her most significant success was as Lola Delaney, in the drama "Come Back, Little Sheba", for which she received her first Tony Award in 1950 (she would go on to win two more). She made her film debut, reprising her role in the 1952 film version, for which she won the Academy Award for Best Actress and the Golden Globe Award for Best Actress for her performance. Despite her successful entry into films, she preferred acting on the stage, and made only four more films.

From 1961 until 1966, she played the title role in the sitcom "Hazel", for which she won two Primetime Emmy Awards. She was later acclaimed for her performance in the 1966 television production of "The Glass Menagerie". Her final role was that of Mrs. Claus in the 1974 animated television special "The Year Without a Santa Claus".

Booth was born Marjory Ford in New York City to Albert James and Virginia M. (née Wright) Ford. In the 1905 New York state census, she was listed as Thelma Booth Ford. She had one sibling, a younger sister, Jean (born in 1914). Her childhood was spent in Flatbush, Brooklyn, where she attended Public School 152.

When she was seven, Booth's family moved to Philadelphia where she first became interested in acting after seeing a stage performance. When Booth was a teenager, her family moved to Hartford, Connecticut, where she became involved in summer stock. She made her stage debut in a production of "Mother Carey's Chickens". Against her father's protests, she dropped out of school and traveled to New York City to further pursue a career. She initially used the name "Thelma Booth" when her father forbade her to use the family name professionally. She eventually changed her name to Shirley Booth.

Booth began her career onstage as a teenager, acting in stock company productions. She was a prominent actress in Pittsburgh theatre for a time, performing with the Sharp Company. Her debut on Broadway was in the play, "Hell's Bells", opposite Humphrey Bogart on January 26, 1925. Booth first attracted major notice as the female lead in the comedy hit "Three Men on a Horse", which ran almost two years in 1935 to 1937. During the 1930s and 1940s, she achieved popularity in dramas, comedies and, later, musicals. She acted with Katharine Hepburn in "The Philadelphia Story" (1939), originated the role of Ruth Sherwood in the 1940 Broadway production of "My Sister Eileen" and performed with Ralph Bellamy in "Tomorrow the World" (1943).

Booth also starred on the popular radio series "Duffy's Tavern", playing the lighthearted, wisecracking, man-crazy daughter of the unseen tavern owner on CBS radio from 1941 to 1942 and on NBC Blue from 1942 to 1943. Her then-husband, Ed Gardner, 
created and wrote the show as well as playing its lead character, Archie, the malapropping manager of the tavern; Booth left the show not long after the couple divorced. She auditioned unsuccessfully for the title role of "Our Miss Brooks" in 1948; she had been recommended by Harry Ackerman, who was to produce the show, but Ackerman told radio historian 
Gerald Nachman that he felt Booth was too conscious of a high school teacher's struggles to have full fun with the character's comic possibilities. "Our Miss Brooks" became a radio and television hit when the title role went to Eve Arden, making her a major star.

Booth received her first Tony Award, for Best Supporting or Featured Actress (Dramatic), for her performance as Grace Woods in "Goodbye, My Fancy" (1948). Her second Tony was for Best Actress in a Play, which she received for her widely acclaimed performance as the tortured wife, Lola Delaney, in the poignant drama "Come Back, Little Sheba" (1950). Her leading man, Sidney Blackmer, received the Tony for Best Actor in a Play for his performance as her husband, Doc.

Her success in "Come Back, Little Sheba" was immediately followed by the musical "A Tree Grows in Brooklyn" (1951), (based on the popular novel) in which she played the feisty but lovable Aunt Sissy, which proved to be another major hit. Her popularity was such that, at the time, the story was skewed from the original so that Aunt Sissy was the leading role (rather than Francie). Booth then went to Hollywood and reprised her stage role in the 1952 film version with Burt Lancaster playing Doc. After that movie, her first of only five films in her career, was completed, she returned to New York and played Leona Samish in "The Time of the Cuckoo" (1952) on Broadway.

In 1953, Booth received the Academy Award for Best Actress in a Leading Role for her performance in "Come Back, Little Sheba", becoming the first actress ever to win both a Tony and an Oscar for the 
same role. The film also earned Booth Best Actress awards from The Cannes Film Festival, the Golden Globe Awards, The New York Film Critics Circle Awards, and National Board of Review. She also received her third Tony, her second in the Best Actress in a Play category, for her performance in the Broadway production of Arthur Laurents' play "The Time of the Cuckoo".

Booth was 54 years old when she made her first movie, although she had successfully shaved almost a decade off her real age, with her publicity stating 1907 as the year of her birth. Her correct year of birth was known by only her closest associates until her correct year of birth, 1898, was announced at the time of her death. Her second starring film, a romantic drama "About Mrs. Leslie" opposite Robert Ryan, was released in 1954 to 
good reviews but was poorly received by audiences. In 1953, Booth had made a cameo appearance as herself in the all-star comedy/drama movie "Main Street to Broadway". She spent the next few years commuting between New York and California. On Broadway, she scored personal successes in the musical "By the Beautiful Sea" (1954) and the comedy "Desk Set" (1955). Although Booth had become well known to moviegoers during this period, the movie roles for both "The Time of the Cuckoo" (re-titled as "Summertime" for the film in 1955), and "Desk Set" (1957), both went to Katharine Hepburn.

In 1957, Booth won the Sarah Siddons Award for her work on the stage in Chicago. She returned to the Broadway stage in 1959, starring as the long-suffering title character in Marc Blitzstein's musical "Juno", an adaptation of Seán O'Casey's 1924 classic play, "Juno and the Paycock". In 1961, director Frank Capra approached Booth about starring in "Pocketful of Miracles", an updated version of Capra's 1933 comedy-drama "Lady for a Day" starring May Robson. Booth informed him that she was unable to match Robson's Oscar-nominated performance in the original film and declined the role. Capra instead cast Bette Davis who was unfavorably compared to Robson by most reviewers when the film was released.

Booth returned to motion pictures to star in two more films for Paramount Pictures, playing Dolly Gallagher Levi in the 1958 film adaptation of Thornton Wilder's romance/comedy "The Matchmaker" (the source text for the musical "Hello, Dolly!"), and to play Alma Duval in the drama "Hot Spell" (1958). For her performances in both films, Booth was nominated as the year's Best Actress by the New York Film Critics Circle (Susan Hayward won for her portrayal of executed murderer Barbara Graham in "I Want to Live!").

In 1961, Booth was cast in the title role on the NBC situation comedy "Hazel", based on Ted Key's popular cartoon panel from the "Saturday Evening Post" about the domineering yet endearing housemaid named Hazel Burke who works for the Baxter family. The series also starred Don DeFore as George Baxter, Whitney Blake as Dorothy "Missy" Baxter" and Bobby Buntrock as the Baxters' young son Harold (whom Hazel called "Sport"). Upon its premiere, "Hazel" was an immediate hit with audiences and drew high ratings.

In 1963, Booth told the Associated Press, at the height of "Hazel"'s popularity, "I liked playing Hazel the first time I read one of the scripts, and I could see all the possibilities of the character—the comedy would take care of itself. My job was to give her heart. Hazel never bores 
me. Besides, she's my insurance policy." Over the course of its five-year run, Booth won two Primetime Emmy Awards for her work in the series and was nominated for a third. Booth is one of the few performers to win all three major entertainment awards (Oscar, Tony, Emmy).

In 1965, NBC canceled the series. It was picked up by CBS and retooled; Don DeFore (George Baxter) and Whitney Blake (Dorothy Baxter) were written out of the series, while Bobby Buntrock (Harold "Sport" Baxter) remained a cast member. Ray Fulmer was cast as Steve Baxter, the brother of DeFore's character George. Lynn Borden, a former Miss Arizona, was cast as Steve's wife Barbara (Booth, who owned the rights to the series, personally hired Borden). Julia Benjamin was cast as Barbara and Steve's daughter, Julia. In the retooled version, George and Dorothy Baxter have moved to Baghdad leaving Harold to live with Steve and Barbara. Hazel remains on as the new Baxters' housekeeper. While ratings for the fifth season were still strong ("Hazel" ranked #26 for the season), Booth decided to end the show due to health issues.

Shortly after the end of "Hazel", Booth appeared in the television production of "The Glass Menagerie" that aired on the anthology series "CBS Playhouse". She won critical acclaim for her performance and was nominated for another Primetime Emmy Award.

Booth's final Broadway appearances were in a revival of Noël Coward's play "Hay Fever" and the musical "Look to the Lilies", both in 1970. In 1971, she returned to Chicago to star opposite Gig Young in a revival of "Harvey" at the Blackstone Theater. In 1973, Booth returned to episodic television in the ABC series "A Touch of Grace". The series was based on the British sitcom "For the Love of Ada". "A Touch of Grace" was canceled after one season.

In 1970, her name was listed as the voice of Tanta Kringle, in "Santa Claus Is Coming to Town". However the voice was really Joan Gardner.

In 1974, Booth provided the voice for the character of Mrs. Claus in the animated television special "The Year Without a Santa Claus". It was Booth's final acting role after which she retired to her home in Cape Cod.

On November 23, 1929, Booth married Ed Gardner, who later gained fame as the creator and host of the radio series "Duffy's Tavern". They divorced in 1942. She married United States Army corporal William H. Baker, Jr. the following year. Booth and Baker remained married until Baker's death from heart disease in 1951. She never remarried and had 
no children from either marriage.

After retiring from acting in 1974, Booth moved to North Chatham, Massachusetts, where she lived with her pet poodle and two cats. She maintained contact with her friends via telephone and spent her time painting and doing needlework. In November 1979, she was inducted into the American Theatre Hall of Fame. Booth chose not to attend the ceremony and the award was accepted by Celeste Holm.

By the 1980s, Booth's health began to decline. She reportedly suffered a stroke that caused mobility issues and blindness. After her death, Booth's sister said she had broken her hip in 1991, which further inhibited her mobility. On October 16, 1992, 
Booth died at age 94 at her home in North Chatham. After a private memorial service, Booth was interred in the Baker family plot in Mount Hebron Cemetery in Montclair, New Jersey.

For her contributions to the film industry, Booth has a motion pictures star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame at 6850 Hollywood Boulevard.





</doc>
<doc id="68323" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68323" title="Susan Sarandon">
Susan Sarandon

Susan Abigail Sarandon (; née Tomalin; born October 4, 1946) is an American actress and activist. She is an Academy Award and BAFTA Award winner who is also known for her social and political activism for a variety of causes. She was appointed a UNICEF Goodwill Ambassador in 1999 and received the Action Against Hunger Humanitarian Award in 2006.

Sarandon began her career in the 1970 film "Joe", before appearing in the soap opera "A World Apart" (1970–71). In 1974, she co-starred as a young Zelda Fitzgerald surrogate in the TV movie "F. Scott Fitzgerald and 'The Last of the Belles'" and in 1975, she starred in the popular cult film "The Rocky Horror Picture Show". She was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Actress for "Atlantic City" (1980), "Thelma & Louise" (1991), "Lorenzo's Oil" (1992), and "The Client" (1994), before winning for "Dead Man Walking" (1995). She has also won the BAFTA Award for Best Actress in a Leading Role for "The Client", and the Screen Actors Guild Award for Best Actress for "Dead Man Walking". Her other films include: "Pretty Baby" (1978), "The Hunger" (1983), "The Witches of Eastwick" (1987), "Bull Durham" (1988), "White Palace" (1990), "Little Women" (1994), "Stepmom" (1998), "Enchanted" (2007), "The Lovely Bones" (2009), "Tammy" (2014), and "The Meddler" (2015).

She made her Broadway debut in "An Evening with Richard Nixon" in 1972 and went on to receive Drama Desk Award nominations for the Off-Broadway plays, "A Coupla White Chicks Sitting Around Talking" (1979) and "Extremities" (1982). She returned to Broadway in the 2009 revival of "Exit the King".

On television, she is a six-time Emmy Award nominee, including for her guest roles on the sitcoms "Friends" (2001) and "Malcolm in the Middle" (2002), and appearances in the TV films "Bernard and Doris" (2007) and "You Don't Know Jack" (2010). In 2017, Sarandon portrayed Bette Davis in the first season of FX's anthology series "Feud", for which she was nominated for both for acting and producing Emmys. She was also nominated for a Daytime Emmy award for executive producing "Cool Women in History" in 2002.

Sarandon was born in Jackson Heights, Queens, New York City. She is the eldest of nine children of Lenora Marie (née Criscione; b. 1923) and Phillip Leslie Tomalin (1917–1999), an advertising executive, television producer, and one-time nightclub singer. She has four brothers, Philip Jr., Terry (deceased May 19, 2016), Tim and O'Brian, and four sisters, Meredith, Bonnie, Amanda, and Missy. Her father was of English, Irish, and Welsh ancestry, his English ancestors being from Hackney in London and his Welsh ancestors being from Bridgend. On her mother's side, she is of Italian descent, with ancestors from the regions of Tuscany and Sicily. Sarandon was raised Roman Catholic and attended Roman Catholic schools. She grew up in Edison, New Jersey, where she graduated from Edison High School in 1964. She then attended The Catholic University of America, from 1964 to 1968, and earned a BA in drama and worked with noted drama coach and master teacher, Father Gilbert V. Hartke.

In 1969, Sarandon went to a casting call for the motion-picture "Joe" with her then-husband Chris Sarandon. Although he did not get a part, she was cast in a major role of a disaffected teen who disappears into the seedy underworld (the film was released in the summer of 1970). Between 1970 and 1972, she appeared on the soap operas "A World Apart" and "Search for Tomorrow", playing Patrice Kahlman and Sarah Fairbanks, respectively. In 1975, she appeared in "The Rocky Horror Picture Show". That same year, she also played the female lead in "The Great Waldo Pepper", opposite Robert Redford. She was twice directed by Louis Malle, in "Pretty Baby" (1978) and "Atlantic City" (1981). The latter earned Sarandon her first Academy Award nomination.

Her most controversial film appearance was in Tony Scott's "The Hunger" in 1983, a modern vampire story in which she had a lesbian sex scene with Catherine Deneuve. In 1987, she appeared in the hit comedy-fantasy "The Witches of Eastwick" alongside Jack Nicholson, Cher, and Michelle Pfeiffer. However, Sarandon did not become a "household name" until her A-list breakthrough opposite Kevin Costner and Tim Robbins (who became her real-life partner) in the 1988 film "Bull Durham", which became a huge commercial and critical success.

Sarandon was nominated for an Academy Award four more times in the 1990s, as Best Actress in "Thelma & Louise" (1991), "Lorenzo's Oil" (1992), and "The Client" (1994), finally winning in 1995 for "Dead Man Walking". She was awarded the Women in Film Crystal Award in 1994. Additionally, she has received eight Golden Globe nominations, including for "White Palace" (1990), "Stepmom" (1998), "Igby Goes Down" (2002), and "Bernard and Doris" (2007).

Her other movies include "Little Women" (1994), "Anywhere but Here" (1999), "Cradle Will Rock" (1999), "The Banger Sisters" (2002), "Shall We Dance" (2004), "Alfie" (2004), "Romance & Cigarettes" (2005), "Elizabethtown" (2005), and "Enchanted" (2007). Sarandon has appeared in two episodes of "The Simpsons", once as herself ("Bart Has Two Mommies") and as a ballet teacher, "Homer vs. Patty and Selma". She appeared on "Friends", "Malcolm in the Middle", "Mad TV", "Saturday Night Live", "Chappelle's Show", "30 Rock", "Rescue Me," and "Mike & Molly".

Sarandon has contributed the narration to two dozen documentary films, many of which dealt with social and political issues. In addition, she has served as the presenter on many installments of the PBS documentary series, "Independent Lens". In 1999 and 2000, she hosted and presented "Mythos", a series of lectures by the late American mythology professor Joseph Campbell. Sarandon also participates as a member of the Jury for the NYICFF, a local New York City Film Festival dedicated to screening films made for children between the ages of 3 and 18.

Sarandon joined the cast of the adaptation of "The Lovely Bones", opposite Rachel Weisz, and appeared with her daughter, Eva Amurri, in "Middle of Nowhere"; both films were made in 2007.
In June 2010, Sarandon joined the cast of the HBO pilot "The Miraculous Year", as Patty Atwood, a Broadway director/choreographer. However, the series was not picked up. In 2012, Sarandon's audiobook performance of Carson McCullers' "The Member of the Wedding" was released at Audible.com. Sarandon was the voice actor for the character of Granny Rags, an eccentric and sinister old lady, in the stealth/action video game "Dishonored", released in 2012. She appeared in the films "Arbitrage" (2012), "Tammy" (2014), and "The Meddler" (2015). In 2017, Sarandon portrayed Bette Davis in the first season of FX's anthology series "Feud".

Sarandon is noted for her active support of progressive and liberal political causes, ranging from donations to organizations such as EMILY's List to participating in a 1983 delegation to Nicaragua sponsored by MADRE, an organization that promotes "social, environmental, and economic justice". In 1999, she was appointed UNICEF Goodwill Ambassador. In that capacity, she has actively supported the organization's global advocacy, as well as the work of the Canadian UNICEF Committee. In 2006, she was one of eight women selected to carry in the Olympic flag at the Opening Ceremony of the 2006 Olympic Winter Games, in Turin, Italy. The same year, Sarandon received the Action Against Hunger Humanitarian Award. Sarandon was appointed an FAO Goodwill Ambassador in 2010.

Sarandon and Robbins both took an early stance against the 2003 invasion of Iraq, with Sarandon stating that she was firmly against war as a pre-emptive strike. Prior to a 2003 protest sponsored by the United for Peace and Justice coalition, she said that many Americans "do not want to risk their children or the children of Iraq". Sarandon was one of the first to appear in a series of political ads sponsored by TrueMajority, an organization established by Ben & Jerry's Ice Cream founder Ben Cohen. Along with anti-war activist Cindy Sheehan, Sarandon took part in a 2006 Mother's Day protest, which was sponsored by Code Pink. In January 2007, she appeared with Robbins and Jane Fonda at an anti-war rally in Washington, D.C. in support of a Congressional measure to withdraw U.S. forces from Iraq.

During the 2000 election, Sarandon supported Ralph Nader's run for president, serving as a co-chair of the National Steering Committee of Nader 2000. During the 2004 election campaign, she withheld support for Nader's bid, being among several "Nader Raiders" who urged Nader to drop out and his voters offer their support for Democratic Party candidate John Kerry. After the 2004 election, Sarandon called for US elections to be monitored by international entities. 
In the 2008 U.S. presidential election, Sarandon and Tim Robbins campaigned for John Edwards in the New Hampshire communities of Hampton, Bedford, and Dover. When asked at We Vote '08 Kickoff Party "What would Jesus do this primary season", Sarandon said, "I think Jesus would be very supportive of John Edwards."

In the 2016 U.S. presidential election, she made public her support for Vermont Senator and democratic socialist Bernie Sanders. On March 28, 2016, in an interview on "All In with Chris Hayes", Sarandon indicated that she and other Sanders supporters might not support Hillary Clinton if Clinton is the Democratic nominee for President. She stated: "You know, some people feel that Donald Trump will bring the revolution immediately. If he gets in, then things will really explode." Hayes inquired as to whether it would be dangerous to allow Trump to become president, to which she replied: "If you think that it's pragmatic to shore up the status quo right now, then you're not in touch with the status quo". On October 30, 2016, she endorsed Green Party of the United States Presidential Candidate Jill Stein.

In an interview with "The Guardian" published on November 26, 2017, Sarandon said about Hillary Clinton: "I did think she was very, very dangerous. We would still be fracking, we would be at war [if she was president]".
Sarandon's mother Leonora Tomalin is a staunch Republican, a supporter of George W. Bush and the Iraq War.

In 1995, Sarandon was one of many Hollywood actors, directors and writers interviewed for the documentary "The Celluloid Closet," which looked at how Hollywood films have depicted homosexuality. In 2003, she appeared in a "Love is Love is Love" commercial, which promoted the acceptance of gay, lesbian, bisexual, and transgender individuals.

Sarandon and Robbins appeared at the 2000 Shadow Convention in Los Angeles to speak about drug offenders being unduly punished. In 2004, she served on the advisory committee for 2004 Racism Watch, an activist group.

Sarandon has become an advocate to end the death penalty and mass incarceration. She has joined the team of people fighting to save the life of Richard Glossip, a man who is on death row in Oklahoma. In May 2015, Sarandon launched a campaign with fundraising platform Represent.com to sell T-shirts to help finance the documentary "Deep Run", the story of a poor North Carolina teen undergoing a gender transition.

On March 12, 2011, Sarandon spoke before a crowd in Madison, Wisconsin protesting Governor Scott Walker and his Budget Repair Bill. On September 27, 2011, Sarandon spoke to reporters and interested parties at the Occupy Wall Street protest in New York City. Her use of the term "Nazi" to describe Pope Benedict XVI on October 15, 2011, created controversy, generating complaints from Roman Catholic authorities, and the Anti-Defamation League, which called on Sarandon to apologize. Sarandon brought Rosa Clemente to the 75th Golden Globe Awards.

While in college, Susan Tomalin met fellow student Chris Sarandon and the couple married on September 16, 1967. They divorced in 1979, but she retained the surname Sarandon as her stage name. She was then involved romantically with director Louis Malle and musician David Bowie. In the mid-1980s, Sarandon dated Italian filmmaker Franco Amurri, with whom she had a daughter, Eva Amurri, on March 15, 1985. Amurri has become an actress as well.

From 1988, Sarandon cohabited with actor Tim Robbins, whom she met while they were filming "Bull Durham". They have two sons: John "Jack" Henry (born May 15, 1989) and Miles Guthrie (born May 4, 1992). Sarandon, like Robbins, is a lapsed Catholic, and they both share liberal political views. The end of Robbins' relationship with Sarandon was announced in late December 2009.
Sarandon split with Robbins in 2009.

Following the dissolution of her relationship with Robbins, she soon began a relationship with Jonathan Bricklin, son of Malcolm Bricklin. Sarandon and Bricklin helped establish a chain of ping-pong lounges named SPiN. Sarandon and Bricklin broke up in 2015.

In 2006, Sarandon and ten relatives, including her then-partner, Tim Robbins, and their son, Miles, traveled to Wales to trace her family's Welsh genealogy. Their journey was documented by the BBC Wales programme, "Coming Home: Susan Sarandon". Much of the same research and content was featured in the American version of "Who Do You Think You Are?" She also received the "Ragusani Nel Mondo" prize in 2006; her Sicilian roots are in Ragusa, Italy. Sarandon is the co-owner of New York ping-pong club SPiN, and its Toronto branch SPiN Toronto.

Sarandon is a vegetarian.

Sarandon received the Lifetime Achievement Award at the 2009 Stockholm International Film Festival, was inducted into the New Jersey Hall of Fame in 2010, and received the Outstanding Artistic Life Award for her Outstanding Contribution to World Cinema at the 2011 Shanghai International Film Festival. In 2013, she was invited to inaugurate the 44th International Film Festival of India (IFFI) in Goa. In 2015, Sarandon received the Goldene Kamera international lifetime achievement award.



</doc>
<doc id="41562" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=41562" title="Ingrid Bergman">
Ingrid Bergman

Ingrid Bergman (; 29 August 1915 – 29 August 1982) was a Swedish actress who starred in a variety of European and American films. She won three Academy Awards, two Emmy Awards, four Golden Globe Awards, a BAFTA Award, and the Tony Award for Best Actress. She is best remembered for her roles as Ilsa Lund in "Casablanca" (1942) and as Alicia Huberman in "Notorious" (1946), an Alfred Hitchcock thriller starring Cary Grant and Claude Rains.

Bergman was born in Stockholm to a Swedish father and a German mother and started her career as an actress in Swedish and German films in the 1930s. Her introduction to American audiences came with her starring role in the English-language remake of "Intermezzo" (1939). At her insistence, producer David O. Selznick agreed not to sign her to a contract—for four films rather than the then-standard seven-year period, also at her insistence—until after "Intermezzo" had been released. Selznick's financial problems meant that Bergman was often loaned to other studios. Apart from "Casablanca", her performances from this period include Victor Fleming's remake of "Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde" (1941), "For Whom the Bell Tolls" (1943), "Gaslight" (1944), and "The Bells of St. Mary's" (1945). Her last films for Selznick were Alfred Hitchcock's "Spellbound" (1945) and "Notorious" (1946). Her final film for Hitchcock was "Under Capricorn" (1949).

After a decade in American films, she starred in Roberto Rossellini's "Stromboli" (1950), following the revelation that she was having an extramarital affair with the director. The affair and then marriage with Rossellini created a scandal in the U.S. that forced her to remain in Europe for several years, after which she made a successful return to working for a Hollywood studio in "Anastasia" (1956), for which she won her second Academy Award. Although she made many films for Hollywood studios in subsequent years, they were all made in Europe and she did not film in Hollywood again until 1969.

According to the "St. James Encyclopedia of Popular Culture", Bergman quickly became "the ideal of American womanhood" and a contender for Hollywood's greatest leading actress. In the United States, she is considered to have brought a "Nordic freshness and vitality" to the screen, along with exceptional beauty and intelligence; David O. Selznick once called her "the most completely conscientious actress" he had ever worked with. In 1999, the American Film Institute ranked Bergman as the of classic American cinema.

Bergman was born on 29 August 1915 in Stockholm, to a Swedish father, Justus Samuel Bergman (2 May 1871 – 29 July 1929), and his German wife, Friedel Henrietta Augusta Louise (née Adler) Bergman (12 September 1884 – 19 January 1918), who was born in Kiel. Her parents married in Hamburg in 1907. She was named after Princess Ingrid of Sweden. She mainly grew up in Sweden, but spent the summers in Germany, and spoke fluent German.

When she was two years old, her mother died. Her father, who was an artist and photographer, died when she was 13. In the years before he died, he wanted her to become an opera star, and had her take voice lessons for three years. But she always "knew from the beginning that she wanted to be an actress," sometimes wearing her mother's clothes and staging plays in her father's empty studio. Her father documented all her birthdays with a borrowed camera.

After his death, she was sent to live with an aunt, who died of heart disease only six months later. She then moved in with her Aunt Hulda and Uncle Otto, who had five children. Another aunt she visited, Elsa Adler, whom Ingrid called "Mutti", reportedly told a family legend to the 11 year old, according to Charlotte Chandler's biography of Ingrid Bergman, that her mother may have had "some Jewish blood." One of Bergman's biographers, Aleksandra Ziolkowska-Boehm, however, believes the claim was likely an embellishment. After doing an in-depth genealogical investigation, Bergman's maternal cousin found no Jewish ancestry on Bergman's mother's side. Furthermore, an investigation of Bergman's ancestry in 1938 when she signed a contract with the German company Universum Film found only non-Jewish ancestors.

Later, she received a scholarship to the state-sponsored Royal Dramatic Theatre School, where Greta Garbo had some years earlier earned a similar scholarship. After several months she was given a part in a new play, "Ett Brott" ("A Crime"), written by Sigfrid Siwertz. Chandler notes that this was "totally against procedure" at the school, where girls were expected to complete three years of study before getting such acting roles.

During her first summer break, she was also hired by a Swedish film studio, which led to her leaving the Royal Dramatic Theatre after just one year, to work in films full-time. Her first film role after leaving the Royal Dramatic Theatre was a small part in "Munkbrogreven" (1935), although she reportedly had previously been an extra in the 1932 film "Landskamp"). She went on to act in a dozen films in Sweden, including "En kvinnas ansikte," which was later remade as "A Woman's Face" with Joan Crawford, and one film in Germany, "Die vier Gesellen" ("The Four Companions") (1938).

Bergman's first acting role in the United States came when Hollywood producer David O. Selznick brought her to America to star in "Intermezzo: A Love Story" (1939), an English language remake of her earlier Swedish film "Intermezzo" (1936). Unable to speak English and uncertain about her acceptance by the American audience, she expected to complete this one film and return home to Sweden. 

Her husband, Dr Petter Lindström, remained in Sweden with their daughter Pia (born 1938). In "Intermezzo", she played the role of a young piano accompanist opposite Leslie Howard as a famous violin virtuoso. She arrived in Los Angeles on 6 May 1939, and stayed at the Selznick home until she could find another residence. According to Selznick's son, Danny, who was a child at the time, his father had a few concerns about Ingrid: "She didn't speak English, she was too tall, her name sounded too German, and her eyebrows were too thick."

Bergman was soon accepted without having to modify her looks or name, despite some early suggestions by Selznick. "He let her have her way," notes a story in "Life" magazine. Selznick understood her fear of Hollywood make-up artists, who might turn her into someone she wouldn't recognize, and "instructed them to lay off". He was also aware that her natural good looks would compete successfully with Hollywood's "synthetic razzle-dazzle". During the following weeks, while "Intermezzo" was being filmed, Selznick was also filming "Gone with the Wind." In a letter to William Hebert, his publicity director, Selznick described a few of his early impressions of Bergman:
"Intermezzo" became an enormous success and as a result Bergman became a star. The film's director, Gregory Ratoff, said "She is sensational," as an actress. This was the "sentiment of the entire set," writes "Life," adding that workmen would go out of their way to do things for her, and the cast and crew "admired the quick, alert concentration she gave to direction and to her lines." Film historian David Thomson notes that this would become "the start of an astonishing impact on Hollywood and America" where her lack of makeup contributed to an "air of nobility." According to "Life," the impression that she left on Hollywood, after she returned to Sweden, was of a tall (5 ft. 9 in.) girl "with light brown hair and blue eyes who was painfully shy but friendly, with a warm, straight, quick smile." Selznick appreciated her uniqueness, and with his wife Irene, they remained important friends throughout her career.

After the onset of World War II, Bergman "felt guilty because she had so misjudged the situation in Germany" while she was there filming "Die vier Gesellen" (The Four Companions). According to one of her biographers, Charlotte Chandler (2007), she had at first considered the Nazis only a "temporary aberration, 'too foolish to be taken seriously.' She believed Germany would not start a war." Bergman felt that "The good people there would not permit it." Chandler adds, "Ingrid felt guilty all the rest of her life because when she was in Germany at the end of the war, she had been afraid to go with the others to witness the atrocities of the Nazi extermination camps."

After completing one last film in Sweden and appearing in three moderately successful films ("Adam Had Four Sons", "Rage in Heaven" and "Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde", all 1941) in the United States, Bergman co-starred with Humphrey Bogart in the classic film "Casablanca" (1942), which remains her best-known role. In this film, she played the role of Ilsa, the beautiful Norwegian wife of Victor Laszlo, played by Paul Henreid, an "anti-Nazi underground hero" who is in Casablanca, a haven from the Nazis. Bergman did not consider "Casablanca" to be one of her favorite performances. "I made so many films which were more important, but the only one people ever want to talk about is that one with Bogart." In later years, she stated, "I feel about "Casablanca" that it has a life of its own. There is something mystical about it. It seems to have filled a need, a need that was there before the film, a need that the film filled."

After "Casablanca", with "Selznick's steady boosting," she played the part of Maria in "For Whom the Bell Tolls" (1943), which was also her first color film. For the role she received her first Academy Award nomination for Best Actress. The film was taken from Ernest Hemingway's novel of the same title. When the book was sold to Paramount Pictures, Hemingway stated that "Miss Bergman, and no one else should play the part." His opinion came from seeing her in her first American role, "Intermezzo," although he hadn't yet met her. A few weeks later, they did meet, and after studying her he said, "You "are" Maria!"

The following year, she won the Academy Award for Best Actress for "Gaslight" (1944), a film in which George Cukor directed her as a "wife driven close to madness" by co-star Charles Boyer. The film, according to Thomson, "was the peak of her Hollywood glory." Bergman next played a nun in "The Bells of St. Mary's" (1945) opposite Bing Crosby, for which she received her third consecutive nomination for Best Actress.

Bergman starred in the Alfred Hitchcock films "Spellbound" (1945), "Notorious" (1946), and "Under Capricorn" (1949). She was a student of the acting coach Michael Chekhov during the 1940s. Chekhov acted with Bergman in "Spellbound" and received his only Academy Award nomination for his performance.

Bergman received another Best Actress nomination for "Joan of Arc" (1948), an independent film based on the Maxwell Anderson play "Joan of Lorraine", produced by Walter Wanger, and initially released through RKO. Bergman had championed the role since her arrival in Hollywood, which was one of the reasons she had played it on the Broadway stage in Anderson's play. The film was not a big hit with the public, partly because of the scandal of Bergman's affair with Italian film director Roberto Rossellini, which broke while the film was still in theatres. Even worse, it received disastrous reviews, and although nominated for several Academy Awards, did not receive a Best Picture nomination. It was subsequently cut by 45 minutes, but restored to full length in 1998 and released in 2004 on DVD.

Between motion pictures, Bergman had appeared in the stage plays "Liliom", "Anna Christie", and "Joan of Lorraine". During a press conference in Washington, D.C. for the promotion of "Joan of Lorraine", she protested against racial segregation after seeing it first hand at the theater she was acting in. This led to a lot of publicity and some hate mail. Bergman went to Alaska during World War II to entertain US Army troops. Soon after the war ended, she also went to Europe for the same purpose, where she was able to see the devastation caused by the war. 

Bergman strongly admired two films by Italian director Roberto Rossellini that she had seen in the United States. In 1949, Bergman wrote to Rossellini, expressing this admiration and suggesting that she make a film with him. This led to her being cast in his film "Stromboli" (1950). During production, Bergman fell in love with Rossellini, and they began an affair. Bergman became pregnant with their son, Renato Roberto Ranaldo Giusto Giuseppe ("Robin") Rossellini (born 2 February 1950).

This affair caused a huge scandal in the United States, where it led to Bergman being denounced on the floor of the United States Senate. Ed Sullivan chose not to have her on his show, despite a poll indicating that the public wanted her to appear. However, Steve Allen, whose show was equally popular, did have her as a guest, later explaining "the danger of trying to judge artistic activity through the prism of one's personal life." Spoto notes that Bergman had, by virtue of her roles and screen persona, placed herself "above all that." She had played a nun in "The Bells of St. Mary's" (1945) and a virgin saint in "Joan of Arc" (1948). Bergman later said, "People saw me in "Joan of Arc" and declared me a saint. I'm not. I'm just a woman, another human being."

As a result of the scandal, Bergman returned to Italy, leaving her husband and daughter (Pia). She went through a publicized divorce and custody battle for their daughter. Bergman and Rossellini were married on 24 May 1950. In addition to Renato, they had twin daughters (born 18 June 1952): Isabella Rossellini, who became an actress and model, and Isotta Ingrid Rossellini, who became a professor of Italian literature.

Rossellini completed five films starring Bergman between 1949 and 1955: "Stromboli," "Europa '51," "Viaggio in Italia," "Giovanna d'Arco al rogo," and "La Paura" ("Fear").

Rossellini directed her in a brief segment of his 1953 documentary film, "Siamo donne" ("We, the Women"), which was devoted to film actresses. His biographer Peter Bondanella notes that problems with communication during their marriage may have inspired his films' central themes of "solitude, grace and spirituality in a world without moral values."
Rossellini's use of a Hollywood star in his typically "neorealist" films, in which he normally used non-professional actors, did provoke some negative reactions in certain circles. In Bergman's first film with Rossellini, her character was "defying audience expectations" in that the director preferred to work without a script, forcing Bergman to act "inspired by reality while she worked, a style which Bondanella calls 'a new cinema of psychological introspection'". Bergman was aware of Rossellini's directing style before filming, as the director had earlier written to her explaining that he worked from "a few basic ideas, developing them little by little" as a film progressed.

After separating from Rossellini, Bergman starred in Jean Renoir's "Elena and Her Men" ("Elena et les Hommes," 1956), a romantic comedy in which she played a Polish princess caught up in political intrigue. Although the film was not a success, her performance in it has since come to be regarded as one of her best.

With her starring role in 1956's "Anastasia" (1956), Bergman made a triumphant return to working for a Hollywood studio (albeit in a film produced in Europe) and won the Academy Award for Best Actress for a second time. Its director, Anatole Litvak, described her as "one of the greatest actresses in the world." He also offered his description of her at the time:

Bergman made her first post-scandal public appearance in Hollywood in the 1958 Academy Awards, when she was the presenter of the Academy Award for Best Picture. She was given a standing ovation after being introduced by Cary Grant as she walked out onto the stage to present the award. She continued to alternate between performances in American and European films for the rest of her career and also made occasional appearances in television dramas such as "The Turn of the Screw" (1959) for the "Ford Startime" TV series—for which she won the Emmy Award for Outstanding Single Performance by an Actress.

During this time, she performed in several stage plays. She married producer Lars Schmidt, a fellow Swede, on 21 December 1958. This marriage ended in divorce in 1975. Schmidt died on 18 October 2009. After a long hiatus, Bergman made the film "Cactus Flower" (1969), with Walter Matthau and Goldie Hawn.

In 1972, U.S. Senator Charles H. Percy entered an apology into the "Congressional Record" for the attack made on Bergman 22 years earlier by Edwin C. Johnson.

Bergman was the President of the Jury at the 1973 Cannes Film Festival.

Bergman became one of the few actresses ever to receive three Oscars when she won her third (and first in the category of Best Supporting Actress) for her performance in "Murder on the Orient Express" (1974). Director Sidney Lumet offered Bergman the important part of Princess Dragomiroff, with which he felt she could win an Oscar. She insisted on playing the much smaller role of Greta Ohlsson, the old Swedish missionary. Lumet discussed Bergman's role:

Bergman could speak Swedish (her native language), German (her second language, learned from her German mother and in school), English (learned when brought over to the United States), Italian (learned while living in Italy) and French (her third language, learned in school). She acted in each of these languages at various times. Fellow actor John Gielgud, who had acted with her in "Murder on the Orient Express" and who had directed her in the play "The Constant Wife", playfully commented: "She speaks five languages and can't act in any of them." (This is from a Dorothy Parker quote which became a snowclone, "That woman speaks eighteen languages, and can't say 'No' in any of them.")

Although known chiefly as a film star, Bergman strongly admired the great English stage actors and their craft. She had the opportunity to appear in London's West End, working with such stage stars as Michael Redgrave in "A Month in the Country" (1965), Sir John Gielgud in "The Constant Wife" (1973) and Wendy Hiller in "Waters of the Moon" (1977–78). 

In 1978, Bergman played in Ingmar Bergman's "Autumn Sonata" ("Höstsonaten") for which she received her 7th Academy Award nomination. This was her final performance on the big screen. In the film, Bergman plays a celebrity pianist who travels to Norway to visit her neglected daughter, played by Liv Ullmann. The film was shot in Norway.

In 1979, Bergman hosted the AFI's Life Achievement Award Ceremony for Alfred Hitchcock.

She was offered the starring role in a television mini-series, "A Woman Called Golda" (1982), about the late Israeli prime minister Golda Meir. It was to be her final acting role and she was honored posthumously with a second Emmy Award for Best Actress. Her daughter, Isabella, described Bergman's surprise at being offered the part and the producer trying to explain to her, "People believe you and trust you, and this is what I want, because Golda Meir had the trust of the people." Isabella adds, "Now "that" was interesting to Mother." She was also persuaded that Golda was a "grand-scale person," one that people would assume was much taller than she actually was. Chandler notes that the role "also had a special significance for her, as during World War II, Ingrid felt guilty because she had so misjudged the situation in Germany."

According to Chandler, "Ingrid's rapidly deteriorating health was a more serious problem. Insurance for Bergman was impossible. Not only did she have cancer, but it was spreading, and if anyone had known how bad it was, no one would have gone on with the project." After viewing the series on TV, Isabella commented,
Bergman was frequently ill during the filming although she rarely complained or showed it. Four months after the filming was completed, she died, on her 67th birthday. After her death, her daughter Pia accepted her Emmy.

In 1937, at the age of 21, Bergman married dentist Petter Aron Lindström (later to become a neurosurgeon); the couple had a daughter, Friedel Pia Lindström (born 20 September 1938). After returning to the United States in 1940, she acted on Broadway before continuing to do films in Hollywood. The following year, her husband arrived from Sweden with daughter Pia. Lindström stayed in Rochester, New York, where he studied medicine and surgery at the University of Rochester. Bergman would travel to New York and stay at their small rented stucco house between films, her visits lasting from a few days to four months.

According to an article in "Life" magazine, the "doctor regards himself as the undisputed head of the family, an idea that Ingrid accepts cheerfully." He insisted she draw the line between her film and personal life, as he has a "professional dislike for being associated with the tinseled glamor of Hollywood." Lindström later moved to San Francisco, California, where he completed his internship at a private hospital, and they continued to spend time together when she could travel between filming.

Bergman returned to Europe after the scandalous publicity surrounding her affair with Italian director Roberto Rossellini during the filming of "Stromboli" in 1950. In the same month the film was released, she gave birth to a boy, Roberto Ingmar Rossellini (born 2 February 1950). A week after her son was born, she divorced Lindström and married Rossellini in Mexico. On 18 June 1952 she gave birth to the twin daughters Isotta Ingrid Rossellini and Isabella Rossellini. In 1957 Rossellini had an affair with Sonali Das Gupta. Soon after, Bergman and Rossellini separated. Rossellini later married Sonali Das Gupta in 1957. Ingrid would marry Lars Schmidt in 1958, a theatrical entrepreneur from a wealthy Swedish shipping family. Curiously, while vacationing with Lars in Monte Gordo beach (Algarve region, Portugal) in 1963, right after recording the TV movie "Hedda Gabler", Ingrid got ticketed for wearing a bikini that showed too much according to the modesty standards of conservative Portugal. After almost two decades of marriage, Ingrid and Lars divorced in 1975. 

During her marriage with Lindström, Bergman had a brief affair with "Spellbound" costar Gregory Peck. Unlike the affair with Rossellini, that with Peck was kept private until he confessed it to Brad Darrach of "People" in an interview five years after Bergman's death. Peck said, “All I can say is that I had a real love for her (Bergman), and I think that’s where I ought to stop…. I was young. She was young. We were involved for weeks in close and intense work.”

Bergman was a Lutheran once saying of herself, "I’m tall, Swedish and Lutheran".

Bergman died on 29 August 1982 at 12:00 AM, her 67th birthday, in London, of breast cancer. Her body was cremated at Kensal Green Cemetery, London, and her ashes taken to Sweden. Most of them were scattered in the sea around the islet of Dannholmen off the fishing village of Fjällbacka in Bohuslän, on the west coast of Sweden, where she spent most of the summers from 1958 until her death in 1982. The rest were placed next to her parents' ashes in Norra Begravningsplatsen (Northern Cemetery), Stockholm, Sweden.

According to biographer Donald Spoto, she was "arguably the most international star in the history of entertainment." After her American film debut in the film "Intermezzo: A Love Story" (1939), co-starring Leslie Howard, Hollywood saw her as a unique actress who was completely natural in style and without need of makeup. Film critic James Agee wrote that she "not only bears a startling resemblance to an imaginable human being; she really knows how to act, in a blend of poetic grace with quiet realism."

According to film historian David Thomson, she "always strove to be a 'true' woman", and many filmgoers identified with her:

Writing about her first years in Hollywood, "Life" magazine stated that "All Bergman vehicles are blessed," and "they all go speedily and happily, with no temperament from the leading lady." She was "completely pleased" with her early career's management by David O. Selznick, who always found excellent dramatic roles for her to play, and equally satisfied with her salary, once saying, "I am an actress and I am interested in acting, not in making money." "Life" adds that "she has greater versatility than any actress on the American screen ... her roles have demanded an adaptability and sensitiveness of characterization to which few actresses could rise."

She continued her acting career while suffering from cancer for eight years, and won international honors for her final roles. "Her spirit triumphed with remarkable grace and courage," adds Spoto. Director George Cukor once summed up her contributions to the film media when he said to her, "Do you know what I especially love about you, Ingrid, my dear? I can sum it up as your naturalness. The camera loves your beauty, your acting, and your individuality. A star must have individuality. It makes you a great star. A great star."

In 1960, Bergman was inducted into the Hollywood Walk of Fame with a motion pictures star located at 6759 Hollywood Boulevard.

Woody Guthrie wrote the erotic song "Ingrid Bergman", which references Bergman's relationship with Roberto Rosselini on the film "Stromboli". It was never recorded by Guthrie but, when later found in the Woody Guthrie archives, it was set to music, and recorded, by Billy Bragg on the album "Mermaid Avenue".

In March 2015, a picture of Bergman photographed by David Seymour was chosen for the main poster for the 2015 Cannes Film Festival. A documentary titled "" was also screened at the festival.

In 1980, Bergman's autobiography was published under the title "Ingrid Bergman: My Story." It was written with the help of Alan Burgess, and in it she discusses her childhood, her early career, her life during her time in Hollywood, the Rossellini scandal, and subsequent events. The book was written after her children warned her that she would only be known through rumors and interviews if she did not tell her own story. It was through this autobiography that her affair with Robert Capa became known.

Bergman won three Academy Awards for acting, two for Best Actress and one for Best Supporting Actress. She ranks tied for second place in terms of Oscars won, with Walter Brennan (all three for Best Supporting Actor), Jack Nicholson (two for Best Actor and one for Best Supporting Actor), Meryl Streep (two for Best Actress and one for Best Supporting Actress), and Daniel Day-Lewis (all three for Best Actor). Katharine Hepburn still holds the record with four (all for Best Actress).




</doc>
<doc id="193843" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=193843" title="Joanne Woodward">
Joanne Woodward

Joanne Gignilliat Trimmier Woodward (born February 27, 1930) is an American actress, producer, activist, and philanthropist. She is best known for her Academy Award-winning role in "The Three Faces of Eve" (1957).

Woodward was born on February 27, 1930, in Thomasville, Georgia, daughter of Elinor (née Trimmier) and Wade Woodward, Jr., who at one point was vice president of publishing company Charles Scribner's Sons. Her middle and maiden names, "Gignilliat Trimmier", are of Huguenot origin. She was influenced to become an actress by her mother's love of movies. Her mother named her after Joan Crawford – "Joanne". Attending the premiere of "Gone with the Wind" in Atlanta, nine-year-old Woodward rushed into the parade of stars and sat on the lap of Laurence Olivier, star Vivien Leigh's partner and future husband. She eventually worked with Olivier in 1977 in a television production of "Come Back, Little Sheba". During rehearsals, she mentioned this incident to him, and he told her he remembered.

Woodward lived in Thomasville until she was in the second grade, when her family relocated to Marietta, Georgia, where she attended Marietta High School. She remains a booster of Marietta High and of the city's Strand Theater. They moved once again when she was a junior in high school after her parents divorced. She graduated from Greenville High School in Greenville, South Carolina, in 1947. Woodward won many beauty contests as a teenager. She appeared in theatrical productions at Greenville High and in Greenville's Little Theatre, playing Laura Wingfield in the staging of "The Glass Menagerie". She returned to Greenville in 1976 to play Amanda Wingfield in another Little Theatre production of "The Glass Menagerie". She also returned in 1955 for the première of "Count Three And Pray", her debut movie, at the Paris Theatre on North Main Street. Woodward majored in drama at Louisiana State University, where she was an initiate of Chi Omega sorority, then headed to New York City to perform on the stage.

Woodward's first film was a post-Civil War Western, "Count Three and Pray", in 1955. She continued to move between Hollywood and Broadway, eventually understudying in the New York production of "Picnic", which featured her future husband Paul Newman.

She appeared with her husband in ten feature films:

Both appeared in the HBO miniseries "Empire Falls" but had no scenes together.

She starred in five films that Newman directed or produced but in which he did not appear:

Woodward acted in films "Summer Wishes, Winter Dreams" (1973) with Martin Balsam and "Philadelphia" (1993), in which she played the mother to Tom Hanks' character. She appeared in the television films "Sybil" (1976), with Sally Field, and "Crisis at Central High" (1981). She was the narrator for Martin Scorsese's screen version of "The Age of Innocence" (1993).

Woodward was a co-producer and starred in a 1993 broadcast of the play "Blind Spot", for which she was nominated for an Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actress – Miniseries or a Movie. She was executive producer of the 2003 television production of "Our Town", featuring Newman as the stage manager (for which he was nominated for an Emmy Award.) She wrote the teleplay and directed a 1982 production of Shirley Jackson's story "Come Along with Me", for which husband Newman provided the voice of the character Hughie under the screen name of P.L. Neuman. In 1995, Woodward directed off-Broadway revivals of Clifford Odets' "Golden Boy" and "Waiting for Lefty" at the Blue Light Theater Company in New York.

Woodward served as the artistic director of the Westport Country Playhouse from 2001 to 2005.

She recorded a reading of singer John Mellencamp's song "The Real Life" for his box set "On the Rural Route 7609". In 2011, she narrated the Scholastic/Weston Woods film "All the World".

Woodward was reported to have been engaged to author Gore Vidal before marrying Paul Newman. However, there was no real engagement: Vidal later claimed it was just a stunt to attract Newman's attention. Woodward shared a house with Vidal in Los Angeles for a short time, and they remained friends.

Woodward first met Newman in 1953. They later reconnected on the set of "The Long Hot Summer" in 1957. Woodward and Newman married on January 29, 1958, in Las Vegas. On March 28 of the same year, Woodward won the Academy Award for Best Actress for "The Three Faces of Eve". The couple remained married for 50 years until Newman's death from lung cancer on September 26, 2008.
Woodward and Newman had three daughters: Elinor Teresa (1959), Melissa Stewart (1961), and Claire Olivia (1965). They also have two grandsons by Melissa.

In 1988, Newman and Woodward established the Hole in the Wall Gang Camp, a nonprofit residential summer camp, and year-round center named after the Wyoming mountain hideaway of the outlaws in Newman's film "Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid". The camp, located in Ashford, Connecticut provides services free of charge to 20,000 children and their families coping with cancer as well as other serious illnesses and conditions.

In 1990, Woodward graduated from Sarah Lawrence College, along with her daughter Clea. Newman delivered the commencement address, during which he said he dreamed that a woman had asked, "How dare you accept this invitation to give the commencement address when you are merely hanging on to the coattails of the accomplishments of your wife?"

Woodward and Newman made their home in Westport, Connecticut.

In 1958, Woodward won the Academy Award for Best Actress for "The Three Faces of Eve". She was nominated for Best Actress in 1969 for "Rachel, Rachel"; in 1974 for "Summer Wishes, Winter Dreams"; and in 1991 for "Mr. and Mrs. Bridge". She was named Best Actress at the Cannes Film Festival in 1974 for her performance in "The Effect of Gamma Rays on Man-in-the-Moon Marigolds".

Woodward won two Emmy Awards for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Miniseries or TV Movie, for "See How She Runs" (1978) as a divorced teacher who trains for a marathon; and in "Do You Remember Love?" (1985) as a professor who begins to suffer from Alzheimer's disease. She has been nominated an additional five times for her roles on television.

A popular (but untrue) bit of Hollywood lore is that Woodward was the first celebrity to receive a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame. In fact, the original 1,550 stars were created and installed as a unit in 1960; no one star was officially "first". The first star actually completed was director Stanley Kramer's. The origin of this legend is not known with certainty, but according to Johnny Grant, the longtime Honorary Mayor of Hollywood, Woodward was the first celebrity to agree to pose with her star for photographers, and therefore was singled out in the collective public imagination as the first awardee.

In 1994, she and her husband were jointly presented the Award for Greatest Public Service Benefiting the Disadvantaged, an award given out annually by Jefferson Awards.




</doc>
<doc id="183785" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=183785" title="Susan Hayward">
Susan Hayward

Susan Hayward (born Edythe Marrenner; June 30, 1917 – March 14, 1975) was an American actress and singer.

After working as a fashion model, Hayward traveled to Hollywood in 1937. She secured a film contract and played several small supporting roles over the next few years.

By the late 1940s, the quality of her film roles had improved, and she achieved recognition for her dramatic abilities with the first of five Academy Award nominations for Best Actress for her performance as an alcoholic in "Smash-Up, the Story of a Woman" (1947). Her career continued successfully through the 1950s and she received subsequent nominations for "My Foolish Heart" (1949), "With a Song in My Heart" (1952), and "I'll Cry Tomorrow" (1955). She finally won the Academy Award for Best Actress for her portrayal of death row inmate Barbara Graham in "I Want to Live!" (1958).

After Hayward's second marriage and subsequent move to Georgia, her film appearances became infrequent, although she continued acting in film and television until 1972. She died in 1975 of brain cancer.

Susan Hayward was born Edythe Marrenner on June 30, 1917 in Brooklyn, the youngest of three children born to Ellen and Walter Marrenner. Her paternal grandmother was an actress, Kate Harrigan, from County Cork, Ireland. Her mother was of Swedish descent. She had an older sister, Florence (born May 1910), and an older brother, Walter, Jr. (born December 1911).

Hayward was educated at Public School 181, and graduated from the Girls' Commercial High School (later renamed Prospect Heights High School). According to the Erasmus Hall High School alumni page, Hayward attended that school in the mid-1930s, so she possibly attended Erasmus Hall High School before transferring to Girls' Commercial High School. During her high school years, she acted in various school plays and was named "Most Dramatic" by her class. She graduated in June 1935.

Hayward began her career as a photographer's model, going to Hollywood in 1937, aiming to secure the role of Scarlett O'Hara in "Gone with the Wind". Although she did not win the role, Hayward found employment playing bit parts until she was cast in "Beau Geste" (1939) opposite Gary Cooper. During the war years, she acted with John Wayne twice, as a second lead in "Reap the Wild Wind" (1942) and as his leading lady in "The Fighting Seabees" (1944). She also starred in the film version of "The Hairy Ape" (1944). After the war, Hayward's career took off when she was contracted by producer Walter Wanger for a seven-year contract at $100,000 a year. with her first film being "Canyon Passage" (1946). 
In 1947, she received the first of five Academy Award nominations for her role as an alcoholic nightclub singer in "Smash-Up, the Story of a Woman", her second film for Wanger. She continued as one of Hollywood's most popular leading ladies in films such as "Tap Roots" (1948), "My Foolish Heart" (1949), "David and Bathsheba" (1951), and "With a Song in My Heart" (1952).

During the 1950s, she won acclaim for her dramatic performances as President Andrew Jackson's melancholic wife in "The President's Lady" (1953); the alcoholic actress Lillian Roth in "I'll Cry Tomorrow" (1955), based on Roth's best-selling autobiography of the same name, for which she received a Cannes award; and the real-life California murderer Barbara Graham in "I Want to Live!" (1958). Hayward's portrayal of Graham won her the Academy Award for Best Actress. In 1959, she played the lead, Mary Sharron, in "Woman Obsessed". In 1956, she was cast by Howard Hughes to play Bortai in the historical epic "The Conqueror", as John Wayne's leading lady.

Though Hayward never truly became known as a singer because she hated her own singing, she portrayed singers in several films. In "I'll Cry Tomorrow," however, though a "ghost singer" was actually recruited, her own voice is actually heard on the soundtrack. Susan Hayward performed in the musical biography of Jane Froman in the 1952 film, "With a Song in My Heart", a role which won her the Golden Globe for Best Actress Comedy film. Jane Froman's voice was dubbed as Hayward acted out the songs.
In 1961, Hayward starred as a working girl who becomes the wife of the state's next governor (Dean Martin) and ultimately takes over that office herself in "Ada". The same year, she played Rae Smith in Ross Hunter's lavish remake of "Back Street", which also starred John Gavin and Vera Miles. In 1967, Hayward replaced Judy Garland as Helen Lawson in the film adaptation of Jacqueline Susann's "Valley of the Dolls".

She received good reviews for her performance in a Las Vegas production of "Mame", but left the production. She was replaced by Celeste Holm.

She continued to act into the early 1970s, when she was diagnosed with brain cancer. Her final film role was as Dr. Maggie Cole in the 1972 made-for-TV drama "Say Goodbye, Maggie Cole." (The film was intended to be a pilot episode for a weekly television series, but because of Hayward's cancer diagnosis and failing health, the series was never produced.) Her last public appearance was at the Academy Awards telecast in 1974 to present the Best Actress award despite being very ill. With Charlton Heston's support, she was able to present the award.

Hayward was married to actor Jess Barker for 10 years and they had two children, fraternal twin sons named Gregory and Timothy, born February 19, 1945. The marriage was described in Hollywood gossip columns as turbulent. They divorced in 1954. Hayward attempted suicide after the divorce. During the contentious divorce proceedings, Hayward stayed in the United States rather than join the Hong Kong location shooting for the film "Soldier of Fortune." She shot her scenes with co-star Clark Gable indoors in Hollywood. A few brief, distant scenes of Gable and a Hayward double walking near landmarks in Hong Kong were combined with the indoor shots.
In 1957, Hayward married Floyd Eaton Chalkley, commonly known as Eaton Chalkley. He was a Georgia rancher and businessman who had formerly worked as a federal agent. Though he was an unusual husband for a Hollywood movie star, the marriage was a happy one. She lived with him on a farm near Carrollton, Georgia. The couple also owned property across the state line in Cleburne County, just outside Heflin, Alabama. She became a popular figure in an area that in the 1950s was off the beaten path for most celebrities. In December 1964, she and her husband were baptized Catholic by Father McGuire at SS Peter and Paul's Roman Catholic Church on Larimer Avenue, in the East Liberty section of Pittsburgh. She had met McGuire while in China and promised him that if she ever converted, he would be the one to baptize her. Chalkley died on January 9, 1966. Hayward went into mourning and did little acting for several years, and took up residence in Florida, because she preferred not to live in her Georgia home without her husband.

Before her Catholic baptism, Hayward was a proponent of astrology. She particularly relied on the advice of Carroll Righter, who called himself "the Gregarious Aquarius" and the self-proclaimed "Astrologer to the Stars", who informed her that the optimum time to sign a film contract was exactly 2:47 am, causing her to set her alarm for 2:45 so she could be sure to obey his instructions. Hayward was a lifelong registered Republican, who endorsed Dwight D. Eisenhower in 1952 and appeared at the 1953 Republican Rally.

Hayward was diagnosed with brain cancer in 1973. On March 14, 1975, she suffered a seizure in her Beverly Hills home and died at the age of 57. She was survived by her two sons from her marriage with Barker. A funeral service was held on March 16 at "Our Lady of Perpetual Help" Roman Catholic Church in Carrollton, Georgia, Hayward's body was buried in the church's cemetery.

Hayward may have developed cancer from radioactive fallout from atmospheric atomic bomb tests while making "The Conqueror" with John Wayne in St. George, Utah. Several production members, as well as Wayne himself, Agnes Moorehead, Pedro Armendáriz, and its director Dick Powell, later succumbed to cancer and cancer-related illnesses. The cast and crew totaled 220 people. By the end of 1980, as ascertained by "People", 91 of them had developed some form of cancer and 46 had died of the disease.

Susan Hayward has a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame at 6251 Hollywood Boulevard.

For a number of years, exhibitors voted Hayward among the most popular stars in the country:




</doc>
