<doc id="63556" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63556" title="Fredric March">
Fredric March

Fredric March (born Ernest Frederick McIntyre Bickel; August 31, 1897 – April 14, 1975) was a "distinguished stage actor and one of Hollywood's most celebrated, versatile stars of the 1930s and 40s." He won the Academy Award for Best Actor for "Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde" (1931) and "The Best Years of Our Lives" (1946), as well as the Tony Award for Best Actor in a Play for "Years Ago" (1947) and "Long Day's Journey into Night" (1956).

March is the only actor to have won both the Academy Award and the Tony Award twice.

March was born in Racine, Wisconsin, the son of Cora Brown Marcher (1863–1936), a schoolteacher, and John F. Bickel (1859–1941), a devout
Presbyterian Church elder who worked in the wholesale hardware business. March attended the Winslow Elementary School (established in 1855), Racine High School, and the University of Wisconsin–Madison where he was a member of Alpha Delta Phi. He began a career as a banker, but an emergency appendectomy caused him to re-evaluate his life, and in 1920, he began working as an extra in movies made in New York City, using a shortened form of his mother's maiden name. He appeared on Broadway in 1926, and by the end of the decade, signed a film contract with Paramount Pictures. March served in the United States Army during World War I as an artillery lieutenant.

March received an Oscar nomination for the 4th Academy Awards in 1930 for "The Royal Family of Broadway", in which he played a role modeled on John Barrymore. He won the Academy Award for Best Actor for the 6th Academy Awards in 1932 for "Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde" (tied with Wallace Beery for "The Champ", although March accrued one more vote than Beery). This led to roles in a series of classic films based on stage hits and classic novels like "Design for Living" (1933) with Gary Cooper and Miriam Hopkins; "Death Takes a Holiday" (1934); "Les Misérables" (1935) with Charles Laughton; "Anna Karenina" (1935) with Greta Garbo; "Anthony Adverse" (1936) with Olivia de Havilland; and as the original Norman Maine in "A Star is Born" (1937) with Janet Gaynor, for which he received his third Oscar nomination.
March resisted signing long-term contracts with the studios, enabling him to play roles in films from a variety of studios. He returned to Broadway after a ten-year absence in 1937 with a notable flop, "Yr. Obedient Husband," but after the success of Thornton Wilder's "The Skin of Our Teeth" he focused as much on Broadway as on Hollywood. He won two Best Actor Tony Awards: in 1947 for the play "Years Ago", written by Ruth Gordon; and in 1957 for his performance as James Tyrone in the original Broadway production of Eugene O'Neill's "Long Day's Journey Into Night". He also had major successes in "A Bell for Adano" in 1944 and "Gideon" in 1961, and played Ibsen's "An Enemy of the People" on Broadway in 1951. During this period he also starred in films, including "I Married a Witch" (1942) and "Another Part of the Forest" (1948), and won his second Oscar in 1946 for "The Best Years of Our Lives".

March also branched out into television, winning Emmy nominations for his third attempt at "The Royal Family" for the series "The Best of Broadway" as well as for television performances as Samuel Dodsworth and Ebenezer Scrooge. On March 25, 1954, March co-hosted the 26th Annual Academy Awards ceremony from New York City, with co-host Donald O'Connor in Los Angeles.
March's neighbor in Connecticut, playwright Arthur Miller, was thought to favor March to inaugurate the part of Willy Loman in the Pulitzer Prize-winning "Death of a Salesman" (1949). However, March read the play and turned down the role, whereupon director Elia Kazan cast Lee J. Cobb as Willy, and Arthur Kennedy as one of Willy's sons, Biff Loman, two men that the director had worked with in the film "Boomerang" (1947). March later regretted turning down the role and finally played Willy Loman in Columbia Pictures's 1951 film version of the play, directed by Laslo Benedek, receiving his fifth and final Oscar nomination as well as a Golden Globe Award. March also played one of two leads in "The Desperate Hours" (1955) with Humphrey Bogart. Bogart and Spencer Tracy had both insisted upon top billing and Tracy withdrew, leaving the part available for March.

In 1957, March was awarded The George Eastman Award, given by George Eastman House for "distinguished contribution to the art of film."

On February 12, 1959, March appeared before a joint session of the 86th United States Congress, reading of the Gettysburg Address as part of a commemorations of the 150th anniversary of Abraham Lincoln's birth.

March co-starred with Spencer Tracy in the 1960 Stanley Kramer film "Inherit the Wind", in which he played a dramatized version of famous orator and political figure William Jennings Bryan. March's Bible-thumping character provided a rival for Tracy's Clarence Darrow-inspired character. In the 1960s, March's film career proceeded with a performance as President Jordan Lyman in the political thriller "Seven Days in May" (1964) in which he co-starred with Burt Lancaster, Kirk Douglas, and Edmond O'Brien; the part earned March a Golden Globe nomination as Best Actor.

March made several spoken word recordings, including a version of Oscar Wilde's "The Selfish Giant" issued in 1945, in which he narrated and played the title role, and "The Sounds of History", a twelve volume LP set accompanying the twelve volume set of books "The Life History of the United States", published by Time-Life. The recordings were narrated by Charles Collingwood, with March and his wife Florence Eldridge performing dramatic readings from historical documents and literature.

Following surgery for prostate cancer in 1970, it seemed his career was over, yet he managed to give one last performance in "The Iceman Cometh" (1973), as the complicated Irish saloon keeper, Harry Hope.

March was married to actress Florence Eldridge from 1927 until his death in 1975, and they had two adopted children. He died from prostate cancer, at age 77, in Los Angeles, California; he was buried at his estate in New Milford, Connecticut.

Throughout his life, he and his wife were supporters of the Democratic Party.

March has a star for motion pictures on the Hollywood Walk of Fame at 1620 Vine Street. In addition, the 500-seat theater at the University of Wisconsin-Oshkosh is named after March, as well as the 168-seat Fredric March Play Circle Theater at the University of Wisconsin-Madison Memorial Union.

Biographies of March include "Fredric March: Craftsman First, Star Second" by Deborah C. Peterson (1996), and "Fredric March: A Consummate Actor" (2013) by Charles Tranberg.




</doc>
<doc id="18433" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18433" title="Lee Marvin">
Lee Marvin

Lee Marvin (February 19, 1924 – August 29, 1987) was an American film and television actor. Known for his distinctive voice and premature white hair, Marvin initially appeared in supporting roles, mostly villains, soldiers, and other hardboiled characters. A prominent television role was that of Detective Lieutenant Frank Ballinger in the NBC crime series "M Squad" (1957–1960).

One of Marvin's most notable film projects was "Cat Ballou" (1965), a comedy Western in which he played dual roles. For portraying both gunfighter Kid Shelleen and criminal Tim Strawn, he won the Academy Award for Best Actor, along with a BAFTA Award, a Golden Globe Award, an NBR Award, and the Silver Bear for Best Actor.

Marvin was born in New York City. He was the son of Lamont Waltman Marvin, an advertising executive and the head of the New York and New England Apple Institute. His mother was Courtenay Washington (née Davidge), a fashion writer and beauty consultant.

As with his elder brother, Robert, he was named in honor of Confederate General Robert E. Lee, who was his first cousin, four times removed. His father was a direct descendant of Matthew Marvin Sr., who emigrated from Great Bentley, Essex, England, in 1635, and helped found Hartford, Connecticut.

Marvin studied violin when he was young. As a teenager, Marvin "spent weekends and spare time hunting deer, puma, wild turkey, and bobwhite in the wilds of the then-uncharted Everglades".

He attended Manumit School, a Christian socialist boarding school in Pawling, New York, during the late 1930s, and later attended St. Leo College Preparatory School, a Catholic school in St. Leo, Florida, after being expelled from several other schools for bad behavior.

Marvin left school at 18 to enlist in the United States Marine Corps Reserve on August 12, 1942. He served with the 4th Marine Division in the Pacific Theater during World War II. While serving as a member of "I" Company, 3rd Battalion, 24th Marines, 4th Marine Division, he was wounded in action on June 18, 1944, during the assault on Mount Tapochau in the Battle of Saipan, during which most of his company were casualties. He was hit by machine gun fire, which severed his sciatic nerve, and then was hit again in the foot by a sniper. After over a year of medical treatment in naval hospitals, Marvin was given a medical discharge with the rank of private first class (he had been a corporal years earlier but had been demoted after causing trouble) in 1945 at Philadelphia.

Marvin's military awards include: the Purple Heart Medal, the Presidential Unit Citation, the American Campaign Medal, the Asiatic-Pacific Campaign Medal, and the World War II Victory Medal, Combat Action Ribbon.

After the war, while working as a plumber's assistant at a local community theatre in upstate New York, Marvin was asked to replace an actor who had fallen ill during rehearsals. He then began an amateur off-Broadway acting career in New York City and eventually made it to Broadway with a small role in the original production of "Billy Budd".

In 1950, Marvin moved to Hollywood. He found work in supporting roles, and from the beginning was cast in various war films. As a decorated combat veteran, Marvin was a natural in war dramas, where he frequently assisted the director and other actors in realistically portraying infantry movement, arranging costumes, and the use of firearms. His debut was in "You're in the Navy Now" (1951), and in 1952, he appeared in several films, including Don Siegel's "Duel at Silver Creek", "Hangman's Knot", and the war drama "Eight Iron Men". He played Gloria Grahame's vicious boyfriend in Fritz Lang's "The Big Heat" (1953). Marvin had a small but memorable role in "The Wild One" (1953) opposite Marlon Brando (Marvin's gang in the film was called "The Beetles"), followed by "Seminole" (1953) and "Gun Fury" (1953). He also had a notable small role as smart-aleck sailor Meatball in "The Caine Mutiny". He had a substantially more important part as Hector, the small-town hood in "Bad Day at Black Rock" (1955) with Spencer Tracy. Also in 1955, he played a conflicted, brutal bank-robber in "Violent Saturday". A latter-day critic wrote of the character, "Marvin brings a multi-faceted complexity to the role and gives a great example of the early promise that launched his long and successful career."

During the mid-1950s, Marvin gradually began playing more important roles. He starred in "Attack", (1956) and had a supporting role in the Western "Seven Men from Now" (1956). He also starred in "The Missouri Traveler" (1958), but over 100 episodes as Chicago cop Frank Ballinger in the successful 1957–1960 television series "M Squad" were needed to actually give him name recognition. One critic described the show as "a hyped-up, violent "Dragnet"... with a hard-as-nails Marvin" playing a tough police lieutenant. Marvin received the role after guest-starring in a memorable "Dragnet" episode as a serial killer. 

In the 1960s, Marvin was given prominent supporting roles in such films as "The Comancheros" (1961), John Ford's "The Man Who Shot Liberty Valance" (1962), and "Donovan's Reef" (1963), all starring John Wayne, with Marvin's roles getting larger with each film. As the vicious Liberty Valance, Marvin played his first title role and held his own with two of the screen's biggest stars (Wayne and James Stewart).

For director Don Siegel, Marvin appeared in "The Killers" (1964) playing an efficient professional assassin alongside Clu Gulager. "The Killers" was also the first film in which Marvin received top billing.

Television series guest appearances he has made include "The Untouchables" in 1962 episode, "Element of Danger", as well as episodes in "Wagon Train", "The Twilight Zone", "Bonanza", and a couple of "Bob Hope" television specials.

Playing alongside Vivien Leigh and Simone Signoret, Marvin won the 1966 National Board of Review Award for male actors for his role in "Ship of Fools" (1965).
Marvin won the 1965 Academy Award for Best Actor for his comic role in the offbeat Western "Cat Ballou" starring Jane Fonda. He also won the 1965 Silver Bear for Best Actor at the 15th Berlin International Film Festival.
Marvin next performed in the hit Western "The Professionals" (1966), in which he played the leader of a small band of skilled mercenaries (Burt Lancaster, Robert Ryan, and Woody Strode) rescuing a kidnap victim (Claudia Cardinale) shortly after the Mexican Revolution. He followed that film with the hugely successful World War II epic "The Dirty Dozen" (1967) in which top-billed Marvin again portrayed an intrepid commander of a colorful group (future stars John Cassavetes, Charles Bronson, Telly Savalas, Jim Brown, and Donald Sutherland) performing an almost impossible mission. In the wake of these two films and after having received an Oscar, Marvin was a huge star, given enormous control over his next film "Point Blank".

In "Point Blank", an influential film for director John Boorman, he portrayed a hard-nosed criminal bent on revenge. Marvin, who had selected Boorman himself for the director's slot, had a central role in the film's development, plot line, and staging. In 1968, Marvin also appeared in another Boorman film, the critically acclaimed but commercially unsuccessful World War II character study "Hell in the Pacific", also starring famed Japanese actor Toshiro Mifune. John Boorman recounted his work with Lee Marvin on these two films and Marvin's influence on his career in the 1998 documentary "". Marvin was originally cast as Pike Bishop (later played by William Holden) in "The Wild Bunch" (1969), but fell out with director Sam Peckinpah and pulled out to star in the Western musical "Paint Your Wagon" (1969), in which he was top-billed over a singing Clint Eastwood. Despite his limited singing ability, he had a hit song with "Wand'rin' Star". By this time, he was getting paid a million dollars per film, $200,000 less than top star Paul Newman was making at the time, yet he was ambivalent about the film business, even with its financial rewards:

Marvin had a much greater variety of roles in the 1970s and 1980s, with fewer 'bad-guy' roles than in earlier years. His 1970s films included "Monte Walsh" (1970) with Jeanne Moreau, the violent "Prime Cut" (1972) with Gene Hackman, "Pocket Money" (1972) with Paul Newman, "Emperor of the North" (1973) opposite Ernest Borgnine, as Hickey in "The Iceman Cometh" (1973) with Fredric March and Robert Ryan, "The Spikes Gang" (1974) with Noah Beery Jr., "The Klansman" (1974) with Richard Burton, "Shout at the Devil" (1976) with Roger Moore, "The Great Scout and Cathouse Thursday" (1976) with Oliver Reed, and "Avalanche Express" (1978) with Robert Shaw. Marvin was offered the role of Quint in "Jaws" (1975) but declined, stating "What would I tell my fishing friends who'd see me come off a hero against a dummy shark?".

Marvin's last big role was in Samuel Fuller's "The Big Red One" (1980), a war film based on Fuller's own war experiences. His remaining films were "Death Hunt" (1981) with Charles Bronson, "Gorky Park" (1983), "Dog Day" (1984), and "" (1985; a sequel with Marvin, Ernest Borgnine, and Richard Jaeckel picking up where they had left off despite being 18 years older); his final appearance was in "The Delta Force" (1986) with Chuck Norris.

During the 1970s, Marvin resided off and on in Woodstock, caring for his dying father, and as a keen fisherman, he used to make regular trips to Australia to engage in fishing for marlin at Cairns and great white shark at Port Fairy. In 1975, Marvin and his second wife Pamela moved to Tucson, Arizona, where he lived until his death.

Marvin was a Democrat who opposed the Vietnam War. He publicly endorsed John F. Kennedy in the 1960 presidential election.

A father of four, Marvin was married twice. His first marriage to Betty Ebeling began in February 1951 and ended in divorce on January 5, 1967; during this time, his hobbies included sport fishing off the Baja California coast and duck hunting along the Mexican border near Mexicali. Ebeling and he had a son, Christopher Lamont (1952–2013), and three daughters: Courtenay Lee (b. 1954), Cynthia Louise (b. 1956), and Claudia Leslie (1958–2012).

Marvin was married to Pamela Feeley from October 18, 1970, until his death.
In 1971, Marvin was sued by Michelle Triola, his live-in girlfriend from 1965 to 1970, who legally changed her surname to "Marvin". Although the couple never married, she sought financial compensation similar to that available to spouses under California's alimony and community property laws. Triola claimed Marvin made her pregnant three times and paid for two abortions, while one pregnancy ended in miscarriage. She claimed the second abortion left her unable to bear children. The result was the landmark "palimony" case, "Marvin v. Marvin", 18 Cal. 3d 660 (1976).

In 1979, Marvin was ordered to pay $104,000 to Triola for "rehabilitation purposes", but the court denied her community property claim for one-half of the $3.6 million which Marvin had earned during their six years of cohabitation – distinguishing nonmarital relationship contracts from marriage, with community property rights only attaching to the latter by operation of law. Rights equivalent to community property only apply in nonmarital relationship contracts when the parties expressly, whether orally or in writing, contract for such rights to operate between them. In August 1981, the California Court of Appeal found that no such contract existed between them and nullified the award she had received. Michelle Triola died of lung cancer on October 30, 2009.

Later there was controversy after Marvin characterized the trial as a "circus", saying "everyone was lying, even I lied". There were official comments about possibly charging Marvin was perjury but no charges were filed.

This case was used as fodder for a mock debate skit on "Saturday Night Live" called "Point Counterpoint", and on "The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson" as a skit with Carson as Adam, and Betty White as Eve.

In December 1986, Marvin was hospitalized for more than two weeks because of a condition related to coccidioidomycosis. He went into respiratory distress and was administered steroids to help his breathing. He had major intestinal ruptures as a result, and underwent a colostomy. Marvin died of a heart attack on August 29, 1987. He is interred at Arlington National Cemetery.

Marvin's appearances on television included
"Suspense" (1 episode, 1950), 
"Rebound", 
"M Squad", 
"Climax!", 
"Biff Baker, U.S.A.", 
"Dragnet", 
"The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson",
"The Ford Show Starring Tennessee Ernie Ford", 
"General Electric Theater", 
"The Americans", 
"The Investigators", 
"The Barbara Stanwyck Show", 
"Route 66", 
"The Untouchables", 
"Checkmate", 
"The Dick Powell Show", 
"Combat!", 
"The Twilight Zone", 
"Kraft Suspense Theatre", 
"Dr. Kildare", 
"Wagon Train", 
"Bonanza", 
"The Virginian"
and "The Muppet Show".




</doc>
<doc id="67022" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67022" title="Lionel Barrymore">
Lionel Barrymore

Lionel Barrymore (born Lionel Herbert Blythe; April 28, 1878 – November 15, 1954) was an American actor of stage, screen and radio as well as a film director. He won an Academy Award for Best Actor for his performance in "A Free Soul" (1931), and remains best known to modern audiences for the role of the villainous Mr. Potter character in Frank Capra's 1946 film "It's a Wonderful Life". He is also particularly remembered as Ebenezer Scrooge in annual broadcasts of "A Christmas Carol" during his last two decades. He is also known for playing Dr. Leonard Gillespie in MGM's nine Dr. Kildare films, a role he reprised in a further six films focussing solely on Gillespie and in a radio series entitled "The Story of Dr. Kildare". He was a member of the theatrical Barrymore family.

Lionel Barrymore was born Lionel Herbert Blythe in Philadelphia, the son of actors Georgiana Drew Barrymore and Maurice Barrymore (born Herbert Arthur Chamberlayne Blyth). He was the elder brother of Ethel and John Barrymore, the uncle of John Drew Barrymore and Diana Barrymore and the great-uncle of Drew Barrymore, among other members of the Barrymore family. He attended private schools as a child, including the Art Students League of New York. While raised a Roman Catholic, Barrymore attended the Episcopal Academy in Philadelphia. Barrymore graduated from Seton Hall Preparatory School, the Roman Catholic college prep school, in the class of 1891.

He was married twice, to actresses Doris Rankin and Irene Fenwick, a one-time lover of his brother, John. Doris's sister Gladys was married to Lionel's uncle Sidney Drew, which made Gladys both his aunt and sister-in-law. Doris Rankin bore Lionel two daughters, Ethel Barrymore II (1908 – 1910) and Mary Barrymore (1916 – 1917). Neither child survived infancy. Barrymore never truly recovered from the deaths of his girls, and their loss undoubtedly strained his marriage to Doris Rankin, which ended in 1923. Years later, Barrymore developed a fatherly affection for Jean Harlow, who was born about the same time as his daughters. When Harlow died in 1937, Barrymore and Clark Gable mourned her as though she had been family.

Reluctant to follow his parents' career, Barrymore appeared together with his formidable grandmother Louisa Lane Drew on tour and in a stage production of "The Rivals" at the age of 15. He later recounted that "I didn't want to act. I wanted to paint or draw. The theater was not in my blood, I was related to the theater by marriage only; it was merely a kind of "in-law" of mine I had to live with." Nevertheless, he soon found success on stage in character roles and continued to act, although he still wanted to become a painter and also to compose music. He appeared on Broadway in his early twenties with his uncle John Drew Jr. in such plays as "The Second in Command" (1901) and "The Mummy and the Hummingbird" (1902), the latter of which won him critical acclaim. Both were produced by Charles Frohman, who produced other plays for Barrymore and his siblings, John and Ethel. "The Other Girl" in 1903–04 was a long-running success for Barrymore. In 1905, he appeared with John and Ethel in a pantomime, starring as the title character in "Pantaloon" and playing another character in the other half of the bill, "Alice Sit-by-the-Fire".

In 1906, after a series of disappointing appearances in plays, Barrymore and his first wife, the actress Doris Rankin, left their stage careers and travelled to Paris, where he trained as an artist. He did not achieve success as a painter, and in 1909 he returned to the US. In December of that year, he returned to the stage in "The Fires of Fate", in Chicago, but left the production later that month after suffering an attack of nerves about the forthcoming New York opening. The producers gave appendicitis as the reason for his sudden departure. Nevertheless, he was soon back on Broadway in "The Jail Bird" in 1910 and continued his stage career with several more plays. He also joined his family troupe, from 1910, in their vaudeville act, where he was happy not to worry as much about memorizing lines.

From 1912 to 1917, Barrymore was away from the stage again while he established his film career, but after the First World War, he had several successes on Broadway, where he established his reputation as a dramatic and character actor, often performing together with his wife. He proved his talent in such plays as "Peter Ibbetson" (1917) (with brother John), "The Copperhead" (1918) (with Doris), "The Jest" (1919) (again with John) and "The Letter of the Law" (1920). Lionel gave a short-lived performance as MacBeth in 1921 opposite veteran actress Julia Arthur as Lady MacBeth, but the production encountered strongly negative criticism. His last stage success was in "Laugh, Clown, Laugh", in 1923, with his second wife, Irene Fenwick; they met while acting together in "The Claw" the previous year, and after they fell in love he divorced his first wife. He also received negative notices in three productions in a row in 1925. After these, he never again appeared on stage.

Barrymore began making films about 1911 with D.W. Griffith at the Biograph Studios. Lionel and Doris were in Paris in 1908, where Lionel attended art school and where their first baby, Ethel, was born. Lionel confirms in his autobiography, "We Barrymores", that he and Doris were in France when Bleriot flew the English Channel on July 25, 1909. Barrymore made "The Battle" (1911), "The New York Hat" (1912), "Friends" and "Three Friends" (1913). In 1915 he co-starred with Lillian Russell in a movie called "Wildfire", one of the legendary Russell's few film appearances. He also was involved in writing and directing at Biograph. The last silent film he directed, "Life's Whirlpool" (Metro Pictures 1917), starred his sister, Ethel. He acted in more than 60 silent films with Griffth.

In 1920, Barrymore reprised his stage role in the film adaptation of "The Copperhead". Before the formation of Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer in 1924, Barrymore forged a good relationship with Louis B. Mayer early on at Metro Pictures. He made several silent features for Metro, most of them now lost. In 1923, Barrymore and Fenwick went to Italy to film "The Eternal City" for Metro Pictures in Rome, combining work with their honeymoon. He occasionally freelanced, returning to Griffith in 1924 to film "America". In 1924, he also went to Germany to star in British producer-director Herbert Wilcox's Anglo-German co-production "Decameron Nights", filmed at UFA's Babelsberg studios outside of Berlin. In 1925, he left New York for Hollywood. He starred as Frederick Harmon in director Henri Diamant-Berger's drama "Fifty-Fifty" (1925) opposite Hope Hampton and Louise Glaum, and made several more freelance motion pictures, including "The Bells" (Chadwick Pictures 1926) with a then-unknown Boris Karloff. His last film for Griffith was in 1928's "Drums of Love".
Prior to his marriage to Irene, Barrymore and his brother John engaged in a dispute over the issue of Irene's chastity in the wake of her having been one of John's lovers. The brothers didn't speak again for two years and weren't seen together until the premiere of John's film "Don Juan" in 1926, by which time they had patched up their differences. After 1926, Barrymore worked almost exclusively for Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer. His first talking picture was "The Lion and the Mouse"; his stage experience allowed him to excel in delivering the dialogue in sound films.

On the occasional loan-out, Barrymore had a big success with Gloria Swanson in 1928's "Sadie Thompson" and the aforementioned Griffith film, "Drums of Love". In 1929, he returned to directing films. During this early and imperfect sound film period, he directed the controversial "His Glorious Night" with John Gilbert, "Madame X" starring Ruth Chatterton, and "The Rogue Song", Laurel & Hardy's first color film. Barrymore returned to acting in front of the camera in 1931. In that year, he won an Academy Award for his role as an alcoholic lawyer in "A Free Soul" (1931), after being considered in 1930 for Best Director for "Madame X". He could play many characters, like the evil Rasputin in the 1932 "Rasputin and the Empress" (in which he co-starred with siblings John and Ethel) and the ailing Oliver Jordan in "Dinner at Eight" (1933 – also with John, although they had no scenes together).

During the 1930s and 1940s, he became stereotyped as a grouchy but sweet elderly man in such films as "The Mysterious Island" (1929), "Grand Hotel" (1932, with John Barrymore), "Captains Courageous" (1937), "You Can't Take It with You" (1938), "On Borrowed Time" (1939, with Cedric Hardwicke), "Duel in the Sun" (1946), "Three Wise Fools" (1946) and "Key Largo" (1948).

In a series of Doctor Kildare movies in the 1930s and 1940s, he played the irascible Doctor Gillespie, a role he repeated in an MGM radio series that debuted in New York in 1950 and was later syndicated. He also played the title role in the 1940s radio series, "Mayor of the Town". Barrymore had broken his hip in an accident, hence he played Gillespie in a wheelchair. Later, his worsening arthritis kept him in the chair. The injury also precluded his playing Ebenezer Scrooge in the 1938 MGM film version of "A Christmas Carol", a role Barrymore played every year but two (replaced by brother John Barrymore in 1936 and replaced by Orson Welles in 1938) on the radio from 1934 through 1953. He also had a role with Clark Gable in "Lone Star" in 1952. His final film appearance was a cameo in "Main Street to Broadway", an MGM musical comedy released in 1953. His sister Ethel also appeared in the film.

He is well known for his role as Mr. Potter, the miserly and mean-spirited banker in "It's a Wonderful Life" (1946) opposite James Stewart. The role suggested that of the "unreformed" stage of Barrymore's "Scrooge" characterization.

Barrymore registered for the draft during World War II despite his age and disability, to encourage others to enlist in the military. He loathed the income tax.

Barrymore was a Republican. In 1944, he attended the massive rally organized by David O. Selznick in the Los Angeles Coliseum in support of the Dewey-Bricker ticket as well as Governor Earl Warren of California, who would become Dewey's running mate in 1948 and later the Chief Justice of the United States. The gathering drew 93,000, with Cecil B. DeMille as the master of ceremonies and with short speeches by Hedda Hopper and Walt Disney. Among the others in attendance were Ann Sothern, Ginger Rogers, Randolph Scott, Adolphe Menjou, Gary Cooper, Edward Arnold, William Bendix, and Walter Pidgeon.

Several sources argue that arthritis alone confined Barrymore to a wheelchair. Film historian Jeanine Basinger says that his arthritis was serious by at least 1928, when Barrymore made "Sadie Thompson". Film historian David Wallace says it was well known that Barrymore was addicted to morphine due to arthritis by 1929. A history of Oscar-winning actors, however, says Barrymore was only suffering from arthritis, not crippled by it. Marie Dressler biographer Matthew Kennedy notes that when Barrymore won his Best Actor Oscar award in 1930, the arthritis was still so minor that it only made him limp a little as he went on stage to accept the honor. Barrymore can be seen being quite physical in late silent films like "The Thirteenth Hour" and "West of Zanzibar", where he can be seen climbing out of a window.

Paul Donnelly says Barrymore's inability to walk was caused by a drawing table falling on him in 1936, breaking Barrymore's hip. Barrymore tripped over a cable while filming "Saratoga" in 1937 and broke his hip again. (Film historian Robert Osborne says Barrymore also suffered a broken kneecap.) The injury was painful enough that Donnelly, quoting Barrymore, says that Louis B. Mayer bought Barrymore $400 worth of cocaine every day to help him cope with the pain and allow him to sleep. Author David Schwartz says the hip fracture never healed, which was why Barrymore could not walk, while MGM historian John Douglas Eames claims that the injury was "crippling". Barrymore himself said in 1951, that it was breaking his hip twice that kept him in the wheelchair. He said he had no other problems, and that the hip healed well, but it made walking exceptionally difficult. Film historian Allen Eyles reached the same conclusion.

Lew Ayres biographer Lesley Coffin and Louis B. Mayer biographer Scott Eyman argue that it was the combination of the broken hip and Barrymore's worsening arthritis that put him in a wheelchair. Barrymore family biographer Margot Peters says Gene Fowler and James Doane said Barrymore's arthritis was caused by syphilis, which they say he contracted in 1925. Eyman, however, explicitly rejects this hypothesis.

Whatever the cause, Barrymore's performance in "Captains Courageous" in 1937 was one of the last times he would be seen standing and walking unassisted. Afterward, Barrymore was able to get about for a short period of time on crutches even though he was in great pain. During the filming of 1938's "You Can't Take It With You", the pain of standing with crutches was so severe that Barrymore required hourly shots of painkillers. By 1938, Barrymore used a wheelchair exclusively and never walked again. He could, however, stand for short periods of time such as at his brother's funeral in 1942.

Barrymore also composed music. His works ranged from solo piano pieces to large-scale orchestral works, such as "Tableau Russe," which was performed twice in "Dr. Kildare's Wedding Day" (1941), first by Nils Asther on piano and later by a full symphony orchestra. His piano compositions, "Scherzo Grotesque" and "Song Without Words", were published by G. Schirmer in 1945. Upon the death of his brother John in 1942, he composed a "memoriam", which was performed by the Philadelphia Orchestra. He also composed the theme song of the radio program "Mayor of the Town".

Barrymore was a skillful graphic artist, creating etchings and drawings. For years, he maintained an artist's shop and studio attached to his home in Los Angeles. Some of his etchings were included in the "Hundred Prints of the Year".

He wrote a historical novel, "Mr. Cantonwine: A Moral Tale" (1953).

Barrymore died on November 15, 1954 from a heart attack in Van Nuys, California. He was entombed in the Calvary Cemetery in East Los Angeles, California.

Barrymore received two stars on the Hollywood Walk of Fame in 1960—a motion pictures star and a radio star. The stars are located at 1724 Vine Street for motion pictures, and 1651 Vine Street for radio. He was also inducted into the American Theater Hall of Fame, along with his siblings, Ethel and John.





</doc>
<doc id="161516" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=161516" title="Maximilian Schell">
Maximilian Schell

Maximilian Schell (8 December 1930 – 1 February 2014) was an Austrian-born Swiss film and stage actor, who also wrote, directed and produced some of his own films. He won the Academy Award for Best Actor for the 1961 American film "Judgment at Nuremberg", his second acting role in Hollywood. Born in Austria, his parents were involved in the arts and he grew up surrounded by acting and literature. While he was a child, his family fled to Switzerland in 1938 when Austria was annexed by Nazi Germany, and they settled in Zurich. After World War II ended, Schell took up acting or directing full-time. He appeared in numerous German films, often anti-war, before moving on to Hollywood.

Schell was top billed in a number of Nazi-era themed films, as he could speak both English and German. Among those were two films for which he received Oscar nominations: "The Man in the Glass Booth" (1975; best actor), where he played a character with two identities, and "Julia" (1977; best supporting actor), where he helps the underground in Nazi Germany.

His range of acting went beyond German characters, however; and during his career, he also played personalities as diverse as Venezuelan leader Simón Bolívar, Russian emperor Peter the Great, and scientist Albert Einstein. For his role as Vladimir Lenin in the television film "Stalin" (1992) he won the Golden Globe Award. On stage, Schell acted in a number of plays, and his was considered "one of the greatest Hamlets ever."

In Schell's private life, he was an accomplished pianist and conductor, performing with Claudio Abbado and Leonard Bernstein, and with orchestras in Berlin and Vienna. His elder sister, Maria Schell, was also a noted Hollywood actress, about whom he produced the documentary "My Sister Maria," in 2002.

Schell was born in Vienna, Austria, the son of Margarethe (née Noe von Nordberg), an actress who ran an acting school, and Hermann Ferdinand Schell, a Swiss poet, novelist, playwright and pharmacy owner. His parents were Roman Catholic.

Schell's father was never enthusiastic about young Maximilian becoming an actor like his mother, feeling that it could not lead to "real happiness." However, Schell was surrounded by acting in his early youth:

The Schell family was forced to flee Vienna in 1938 to get "away from Hitler" after the Anschluss, when Austria was annexed by Nazi Germany. They resettled in Zurich, Switzerland.

In Zurich, Schell "grew up reading the classics," and when he was ten, wrote his first play. Schell recalls that as a child, growing up surrounded by the theatre, he took acting for granted and didn't want to become an actor at first: "What I wanted was to become a painter, a musician, or a playwright," like his father.

Schell later attended the University of Zurich for a year, where he also played soccer and was on the rowing team, along with writing for newspapers as a part-time journalist for income. Following the end of World War II, he moved to Germany where he enrolled in the University of Munich and studied philosophy and art history. During breaks, he would sometimes return home to Zurich or stay at his family's farm in the country so he could write in seclusion:

Schell then returned to Zurich, where he served in the Swiss Army for a year, after which he re-entered the University of Zurich for another year, and later, the University of Basel for six months. During that period, he acted professionally in small parts, in both classical and modern plays, and decided that he would from then on devote his life to acting rather than pursue academic studies:

Schell began acting at the Basel Theatre.

Schell's late elder sister, Maria Schell, was also an actress, as are their two other siblings, Carl and Immy (Immaculata) Schell.

Schell's film debut was in the German anti-war film "Kinder, Mütter und ein General" ("Children, Mothers, and a General", 1955). It was the story of five mothers who confronted a German general at the front line, after learning that their sons, some as young as 15, had been "slated to be cannon fodder on behalf of the Third Reich." The film co-starred Klaus Kinski as an officer, with Schell playing the part of an officer-deserter. The story, which according to one critic, "depicts the insanity of continuing to fight a war that is lost," would become a "trademark" for many of Schell's future roles: "Schell's sensitivity in his portrayal of a young deserter disillusioned with fighting became a trademark of his acting."

Schell subsequently acted in seven more films made in Europe before going to the U.S. Among those was "The Plot to Assassinate Hitler" (also 1955). Later in the same year he had a supporting role in "Jackboot Mutiny", in which he plays "a sensitive philosopher," who uses ethics to privately debate the arguments for assassinating Hitler.

In 1958 Schell was invited to the United States to act in the Broadway play, "Interlock" by Ira Levin, in which Schell played the role of an aspiring concert pianist. He made his Hollywood debut in the World War II film, "The Young Lions" (1958), as the commanding German officer in another anti-war story, with Marlon Brando and Montgomery Clift. German film historian Robert C. Reimer writes that the film, directed by Edward Dmytryk, again drew on Schell's powerful German characterisation to "portray young officers disillusioned with a war that no longer made sense."

In 1960, Schell returned to Germany and played the title role in William Shakespeare's "Hamlet" for German TV, a role that he would play on two more occasions in live theatre productions during his career. Along with Laurence Olivier, Schell is considered "one of the greatest Hamlets ever," according to some. Schell recalled that when he played Hamlet for the first time, "it was like falling in love with a woman. ... not until I acted the part of Hamlet did I have a moment when I knew I was in love with acting." Schell's performance of Hamlet was featured as one of the last episodes of the American comedy series "Mystery Science Theater 3000" in 1999.

In 1959, Schell acted in the role of a defense attorney on a live TV production of "Judgment at Nuremberg", a fictionalized re-creation of the Nuremberg War Trials, in an edition of "Playhouse 90". His performance in the TV drama was considered so good that he and Werner Klemperer were among the only members of the original cast selected to play the same parts in the 1961 film version. He won the Academy Award for Best Actor, which was the first win for a German-speaking actor since World War II.

After also winning the New York Film Critics award for his role, Schell recalled the pride he felt upon receiving a letter from his older sister, Maria Schell, who was already an award-winning actress:

According to Reimer, Schell gave a "bravura performance," where he tried to defend his clients, Nazi judges, "by arguing that all Germans share a collective guilt" for what happened. Biographer James Curtis notes that Schell prepared for his part in the movie by "reading the entire forty-volume record of the Nuremberg trials." Author Barry Monush describes the impact of Schell's acting:

Producer-director Stanley Kramer assembled a star-studded ensemble cast which included Spencer Tracy and Burt Lancaster. They "worked for nominal wages out of a desire to see the film made and for the opportunity to appear in it," notes film historian George McManus. Actor William Shatner remembers that prior to the actual filming, "we understood the importance of the film we were making." It was nominated for eleven Academy Awards, winning two. In 2011, Schell appeared at a 50th anniversary tribute to the film and his Oscar win, held in Los Angeles at the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences, where he spoke about his career and the film.

Beginning in 1968 Schell began writing, producing, directing and acting in a number of his own films: Among those were "The Castle" (1968), a German film based on the novel by Franz Kafka, about a man trapped in a bureaucratic nightmare. Soon after he made "Erste Liebe (First Love)" (1970), based on a novel by Ivan Turgenev. The film was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film.

Schell's next film, "The Pedestrian" (1974), is about a German tycoon "haunted by his Nazi past". In this film, notes one critic, "Schell probes the conscience and guilt in terms of the individual and of society, reaching to the universal heart of responsibility and moral inertia." It was nominated for the Best Foreign Language Film Oscar and was a "great and commercial success in Germany," notes Roger Ebert.

Schell then produced, directed and acted as a supporting character in "End of the Game" (1975), a German crime thriller starring Jon Voight and Jacqueline Bisset. A few years later he co-wrote and directed the Austrian film "Tales from the Vienna Woods" (1979).

During his career, as one of the few German-speaking actors working in English-language films, Schell was top billed in a number of Nazi-era themed films, including "Counterpoint" (1968), "The Odessa File" (1974)", The Man in the Glass Booth" (1975), "A Bridge Too Far" (1977), "Cross of Iron" (1977) and "Julia" (1977). For the latter film, directed by Fred Zinnemann, Schell was again nominated for an Oscar for his supporting role as an anti-Nazi activist.

In a number of films Schell played the role of a Jewish character: as Otto Frank, Anne Frank's father, in "The Diary of Anne Frank" (1980); as the modern Zionist father in "The Chosen" (1981); in 1996, he played an Auschwitz survivor in "Through Roses", a German film, written and directed by Jürgen Flimm; and in "Left Luggage" (1998) he played the father of a Jewish family.

In "The Man in the Glass Booth" (1975), adapted from the stage play by Robert Shaw, Schell played both a Nazi officer and a Jewish Holocaust survivor, in a character with a double identity. Roger Ebert describes the main character, Albert Goldman, as "mad, and immensely complicated, and he is hidden in a maze of identities so thick that no one knows for sure who he really is." Schell, who at that period in his career saw himself primarily as a director, felt compelled to accept the part when it was offered to him:

Schell's acting in the film has been compared favorably to his other leading roles, with film historian Annette Insdorf writing, "Maximilian Schell is even more compelling as the quick-tempered, quicksilver Goldman than in his previous Holocaust-related roles, including "Judgment at Nuremberg" and "The Condemned of Altona"". She gives a number of examples of Schell's acting intensity, including the courtroom scenes, where Schell's character, after supposedly being exposed as a German officer, "attacks Jewish meekness" in his defense, and "boasts that the Jews were sheep who didn't believe what was happening." The film eventually suggests that Schell's character is in fact a Jew, but one whose sanity has been compromised by "survivor guilt." Schell was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Actor and the Golden Globe Award for Best Actor for his performance.

To avoid being typecast, Schell also played more diverse characters in numerous films throughout his career: he played a museum treasure thief in "Topkapi" (1964); a Venezuelan leader in "Simón Bolívar" (1969); a 19th-century ship captain in "Krakatoa, East of Java" (1969); a Captain Nemo-esque scientist/starship commander in the science fiction film, "The Black Hole" (1979); the Russian emperor in the television miniseries, "Peter the Great" (1986), opposite Laurence Olivier, Vanessa Redgrave and Trevor Howard, which won an Emmy Award; a comedy role with Marlon Brando in "The Freshman" (1990); Reese Witherspoon's surrogate grandfather in "A Far Off Place"; a treacherous Cardinal in "John Carpenter's Vampires" (1998); as Frederick the Great in a TV film, "Young Catherine" (1991); as Vladimir Lenin in the TV series, "Stalin" (1992), for which he won the Golden Globe Award; a Russian KGB colonel in "Candles in the Dark" (1993); the Pharaoh in "Abraham" (1994); and Tea Leoni's father in the science fiction thriller, "Deep Impact" (1998).

From the 1990s until late in his career, Schell appeared in many German-language made-for-TV films, such as the 2003 film "Alles Glück dieser Erde" ("All the Luck in the World") opposite Uschi Glas and in the television miniseries "The Return of the Dancing Master" (2004), which was based on Henning Mankell's novel. In 2006 he appeared in the stage play of Arthur Miller's "Resurrection Blues", directed by Robert Altman, which played in London at the Old Vic. In 2007, he played the role of Albert Einstein on the German television series "Giganten" (Giants), which enacted the lives of people important in German history.

Schell also served as a writer, producer and director for a variety of films, including the problematic documentary film "Marlene" (1984), with the unwilling participation of Marlene Dietrich. It was nominated for an Oscar, received the New York Film Critics Award and the German Film Award. Originally, Dietrich, then 83 years of age, had agreed to allow Schell to interview and film her in the privacy of her apartment. However, after he began filming, she changed her mind and refused to allow any actual video footage of her be shown. During a videotaped interview, Schell described the difficulties he had while making the film.

Schell creatively showed only silhouettes of her along with old film clips during their interview soundtrack. According to one review, "the true originality of the movie is the way it pursues the clash of temperament between interviewer and star. . . . he draws her out, taunting her into a fascinating display of egotism, lying and contentiousness."

In 2002, Schell produced his most intimate film, "My Sister Maria", a documentary about his sister, noted actress Maria Schell. In the film, he chronicles her life, career and eventual diminished capacity due to illness. The film, made three years before her death, shows her mental and physical frailty, leading to her withdrawing from the world. In 2002, upon the completion of the film, they both received Bambi Awards, and were honored for their lifetime achievements and in recognition of the film.

During the 1960s Schell had a three-year-long affair with Soraya Esfandiary-Bakhtiari, former wife of the last Shah of Iran. He also was rumored to have been engaged to the first African American Supermodel Donyale Luna in the mid 1960s. In 1985 he met the Russian actress Natalya Andrejchenko, whom he married in June 1986; their daughter Nastassja was born in 1989. After 2002, separated from his wife (whom he divorced in 2005), Schell had a relationship with the Austrian art historian Elisabeth Michitsch. From 2008 he was romantically involved with German opera singer Iva Mihanovic; they eventually married on 20 August 2013.

Schell was a semi-professional pianist for much of his life. He had a piano when he lived in Munich and said that he would play for hours at a time for his own pleasure and to help him relax: "I find I need to rest. An actor must have pauses in between work, to renew himself, to read, to walk, to chop wood."

Conductor Leonard Bernstein claimed that Schell was a "remarkably good pianist." In 1982, on a program filmed for the U.S. television network PBS, before Bernstein conducted the Vienna Philharmonic playing Beethoven symphonies, Schell read from Beethoven's letters to the audience. In 1983, he and Bernstein co-hosted an 11-part TV series, "Bernstein/Beethoven", featuring nine live symphonies, along with discussions between Bernstein and Schell about Beethoven's works.
On other occasions, Schell worked with Italian conductor Claudio Abbado and the Berlin Philharmonic, which included a performance in Chicago of Igor Stravinsky's "Oedipus Rex", and another in Jerusalem, of Arnold Schoenberg's "A Survivor from Warsaw". Schell also produced and directed a number of live operas, including Richard Wagner's "Lohengrin" for the Los Angeles Opera. He worked on the film project "Beethoven's Fidelio," with Plácido Domingo and Kent Nagano.

Schell was a guest professor at the University of Southern California and was awarded an Honorary Doctorate from Spertus Institute for Jewish Learning and Leadership in Chicago.

Schell died age 83 on 1 February 2014, in Innsbruck, Austria after a "sudden and serious illness". The German television news service Tagesschau reported that he had been receiving treatment for pneumonia.
His grave is in Preitenegg/Carinthia (Austria) where the family home was and where he and his sister lived until the end.





</doc>
<doc id="145646" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=145646" title="Paul Lukas">
Paul Lukas

Paul Lukas (born Pál Lukács; May 26, 1894 – August 15, 1971) was a Hungarian actor. He won the Academy Award for Best Actor for his performance in the film "Watch on the Rhine" (1943), reprising the role he created on the Broadway stage.

Lukas was born Pál Lukács in Budapest into a Jewish family, the son of Adolf Munkácsi and Mária Schneckendorf. He was later adopted by Mária (née Zilahy) and János Lukács, an advertising executive.

Lukas made his stage debut in Budapest in 1916 and his film debut in 1917. At first, he played elegant, smooth womanizers, but increasingly he became typecast as a villain. He had a successful stage and film career in Hungary, Germany, and Austria, where he worked with Max Reinhardt. He arrived in Hollywood in 1927 and became a naturalized citizen of the United States in 1937.
He was busy in the 1930s, appearing in such films as the melodrama "Rockabye", the crime caper "Grumpy", Alfred Hitchcock's "The Lady Vanishes", the comedy "Ladies in Love", and the drama "Dodsworth". He followed William Powell and Basil Rathbone portraying the series detective Philo Vance, a cosmopolitan New Yorker, once in "The Casino Murder Case" (1935).

His major film success came in "Watch on the Rhine" (1943), where he played a man working against the Nazis, a role he originated in the Broadway premiere of the play of the same name in 1941. His portrayal of Kurt Mueller, a German émigré with an American wife, played by Bette Davis, was universally lauded by critics. Brooks Atkinson of the "New York Times", wrote, "As the enemy of fascism, Mr. Lukas' haggard, loving, resourceful determination becomes heroic by virtue of his sincerity and his superior abilities as an actor." He won the Academy Award for Best Actor for the role, winning out over luminary efforts as Humphrey Bogart in "Casablanca", Gary Cooper in "For Whom the Bell Tolls", Walter Pidgeon in "Madame Curie", and Mickey Rooney in "The Human Comedy". He also received the New York Film Critics Award for his performance.

In 1943, he guest starred as the eponymous character in an episode of the radio program "Suspense", "Mr. Markham, Antique Dealer". On April 2, 1944, he starred in "The Steadfast Heart" on "Silver Theater".

Modern viewers also remember Lukas for his role as Professor Aronnax in Walt Disney's film version of Jules Verne's "20,000 Leagues Under the Sea" (1954). By that time, however, he was, at age 60, suffering from memory problems during the production, apparently leading him to lash out at cast and crew alike. Even friend Peter Lorre was not immune to the abuse.

In the 1940s, Lukas was a charter member of the Motion Picture Alliance for the Preservation of American Ideals, a conservative lobbying group opposed to possible Communist influence in Hollywood.

Lukas' film career picked up momentum in the 1960s with six films, including "Fun in Acapulco" with Elvis Presley in 1963 and "Lord Jim" with Peter O'Toole in 1965. His final film, "The Challenge", was released in 1970.

The remainder of his career moved from Hollywood to the stage to television. His only singing role was as Cosmo Constantine in the original 1950 Broadway stage version of Irving Berlin's "Call Me Madam", opposite Ethel Merman (although he is heard singing a song in the 1933 film "Little Women", displaying a pleasant voice).

Lukas died August 15, 1971, in Tangier, Morocco, reportedly while searching for a place to spend his retirement years. He is buried in Spain.

Lukas was honored with a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame at 6821 Hollywood Boulevard on February 8, 1960.




</doc>
<doc id="45188" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45188" title="Paul Muni">
Paul Muni

Paul Muni (born Frederich Meshilem Meier Weisenfreund; September 22, 1895 – August 25, 1967) was an American stage and film actor who grew up in Chicago. Muni was a five-time Academy Award nominee, with one win. He started his acting career in the Yiddish theatre. During the 1930s, he was considered one of the most prestigious actors at the Warner Bros. studio, and was given the rare privilege of choosing which parts he wanted.

His acting quality, usually playing a powerful character, such as the lead in "Scarface" (1932), was partly a result of his intense preparation for his parts, often immersing himself in study of the real character's traits and mannerisms. He was also highly skilled in using makeup techniques, a talent he learned from his parents, who were also actors, and from his early years on stage with the Yiddish theater in Chicago. At the age of 12, he played the stage role of an 80-year-old man; in one of his films, "Seven Faces," he played seven different characters.

He made 25 films and won the Academy Award for Best Actor for his role in the 1936 film "The Story of Louis Pasteur". He also starred in numerous Broadway plays and won the Tony Award for Best Actor in a Play for his role in the 1955 production of "Inherit the Wind".

His Hebrew name was Meshilem; he was also called Frederich Meier Weisenfreund, born to a Jewish family in Lemberg, Galicia, a province of the Austro-Hungarian Empire. (It is now Lviv, Ukraine). His parents were Salli and Phillip Weisenfreund. He learned Yiddish as his first language. When he was seven, he emigrated with his family to the United States in 1902; they settled in Chicago.
As a boy, he was known as "Moony". He started his acting career in the Yiddish theatre in Chicago with his parents, who were both actors. As a teenager, he developed a skill in creating makeup, which enabled him to play much older characters. Film historian Robert Osborne notes that Muni's makeup skills were so creative, that for most of his roles, "he transformed his appearance so completely, he was dubbed 'the new Lon Chaney.'" In his first stage role at the age of 12, Muni played the role of an 80-year-old man.

He was quickly recognized by Maurice Schwartz, who signed him up with his Yiddish Art Theater. Edward G. Robinson and Paul Muni were cousins to Charles M. Fritz, who was a notable actor during the Great Depression.

A 1925 "New York Times" article singled out Sam Kasten's and Muni's performances at the People's Theater as among the highlights of that year's Yiddish theater season, describing them as second only to Ludwig Satz.

Muni began acting on Broadway in 1926. His first role was that of an elderly Jewish man in the play "We Americans", written by playwrights Max Siegel and Milton Herbert Gropper. It was the first time that he ever acted in English.

In 1921, he married Bella Finkel (February 8, 1898 – October 1, 1971), an actress in the Yiddish theatre. They remained married until Muni's death in 1967.

In 1929, Muni was signed by Fox. His name was simplified and anglicized to Paul Muni (he had the nickname "Moony" when young). His acting talents were quickly recognized and he received an Oscar nomination for his first film, "The Valiant" (1929), although the film did poorly at the box office. His second film, "Seven Faces" (also 1929), was also a financial failure. Unhappy with the roles offered him, he returned to Broadway, where he starred in a major hit play, "Counselor at Law".

Paul Muni soon returned to Hollywood to star in such harrowing pre-Code films as the original "Scarface" and "I Am a Fugitive from a Chain Gang" (both 1932). For the second, he was nominated for an Oscar for Best Actor. The acclaim that Muni received as a result of this performance so impressed Warner Bros., they signed him to a long-term contract, publicizing him as "the screen's greatest actor."

"Scarface", part of a cycle of gangster films at the time, was written by Ben Hecht and directed by Howard Hawks. Critic Richard Corliss noted in 1974 that, while it was a serious gangster film, it also "manages both to congratulate journalism for its importance and to chastise it for its chicanery, by underlining the newspapers' complicity in promoting the underworld image."

In 1935, Muni persuaded Warner Bros. to take a financial risk by producing the historical biography "The Story of Louis Pasteur". This became Muni's first of many biographical roles. He starred as a crusading scientist who fights derision in his native country to prove that his medical theories will save lives. Until that film, most Warner Bros. stories originated from current events and major news stories, with the notable exceptions of George Arliss's earlier biographical films "Disraeli", "Alexander Hamilton", and "Voltaire". The sudden success of "Pasteur" gave Warner's "box office gold", notes Osborne. Muni won an Oscar for his performance (as had Arliss for his performance in "Disraeli" six years earlier).

He played other historical figures, including Émile Zola, a "man of conscience", in "The Life of Emile Zola" (1937), for which he was nominated for an Oscar. The film won Best Picture and was interpreted as indirectly attacking the repression of Nazi Germany. He also played the lead role in "Juarez" (1939).

In 1937, Muni played a Chinese peasant, with a new bride, in a film adaptation of Pearl Buck's novel "The Good Earth". It co-starred Luise Rainer as his wife; she won an Academy Award for her part. The film was a recreation of a revolutionary period in China, and included special effects for a locust attack and the overthrow of the government. Because Muni was not of Asian descent, when producer Irving Thalberg offered him the role, he said, "I'm about as Chinese as [President] Herbert Hoover."

Dissatisfied with life in Hollywood, Muni chose not to renew his contract. He returned to the screen only occasionally in later years, for such roles as Frédéric Chopin's teacher in "A Song to Remember" (1945). In 1946, he starred in a rare comic performance, "Angel on My Shoulder", playing a gangster whose early death prompts the Devil (played by Claude Rains) to make mischief by putting his soul into the body of a judge. His new identity turns the former criminal into a model citizen.

Muni then focused most of his energies on stage work, and occasionally on television roles. In 1946, he appeared on Broadway in "A Flag is Born", written by Ben Hecht, to help promote the creation of a Jewish state in Israel. This play was directed by Luther Adler and co-starred Marlon Brando. Years later, in response to a question put to him by Alan King, Brando stated that Muni was the greatest actor he ever saw. At London's Phoenix Theatre on July 28, 1949, Muni began a run as Willy Loman in the first English production of "Death of a Salesman" by Arthur Miller. He took over from Lee J. Cobb, who had played the principal role in the original Broadway production. Both productions were directed by Elia Kazan.

A few years later, during 1955 and 1956, Muni had his biggest stage success in the United States as the crusading lawyer, Henry Drummond (based on Clarence Darrow), in "Inherit the Wind", winning a Tony Award for Best Performance by a Leading Actor in a Play. In late August 1955, Muni was forced to withdraw from the play, due to a serious eye ailment causing deterioration in his eyesight. He was later replaced by actor Melvyn Douglas.

In early September 1955, Muni, then 59 years old, was diagnosed with a tumor of the left eye. The eye was removed in an operation at Mt. Sinai Hospital in New York. His right eye was reported to be normal. In early December 1955, Muni returned to his starring role as Henry Drummond in the play "Inherit the Wind".

His last movie role was as an aging doctor in "The Last Angry Man" (1959), and he was again nominated for an Oscar. After that, Muni mostly retired from acting to deal with failing eyesight and other health problems. He made his final screen appearance on television, in a guest role on the dramatic series "Saints and Sinners" in 1962.

Muni was noted for his intense preparation for his roles, especially the biographies. While preparing for "The Story of Louis Pasteur", Muni said, "I read most everything that was in the library, and everything I could lay my hands on that had to do with Pasteur, with Lister, or with his contemporaries." He did the same in preparing for his role as Henry Drummond, based on Clarence Darrow, in the play "Inherit the Wind". He read what he could find, talked to people who knew Darrow personally, and studied physical mannerisms from photographs of him. "To Paul Muni, acting was not just a career, but an obsession", writes the "New York Times". They note that despite his enormous success both on Broadway and in films, "he threw himself into each role with a sense of dedication." Playwright Arthur Miller commented that Muni "was pursued by a fear of failure."

As Muni was born into an acting family, with both of his parents professional actors, "he learned his craft carefully and thoroughly." On stage, "a Muni whisper could reach the last balcony of any theater", writes the "Times". It wrote that his style "had drawn into it the warmth of the Yiddish stage", in which he made his debut at the age of 12. In addition, his technique in using makeup "was a work of art." Combined with acting which followed no "method", he perfected his control of voice and gestures into an acting style that was "unique."

Film historian David Shipman described Muni as "an actor of great integrity", noting he meticulously prepared for his roles. Muni was widely recognized as eccentric if talented: he objected to anyone wearing red in his presence, but at the same time could often be found between sessions playing his violin. Over the years, he became increasingly dependent on his wife, Bella, a dependence which increased as his failing eyesight turned to blindness in his final years. Muni was "inflexible on matters of taste and principle", once turning down an $800,000 movie contract because he was not happy with the studio's choice of film roles.

Although Muni was considered one of the best film actors of the 1930s, he has gained a bad reputation for his performances by film critics such as David Thomson and Andrew Sarris, who accuse him of overacting.

German director William Dieterle, who directed him in his three biopics, also frequently accused him of overacting, despite his respect for the actor.

In his private life, Muni was considered "exceedingly shy", and was discomfited to be recognized while out shopping or dining. He enjoyed reading and going for walks with his wife in secluded sections of Central Park. He always arrived at the theater by 7:30 pm to prepare for that night's performance. After retiring from acting, he lived in California, in what was considered an "austere" setting, where his wife and he enjoyed their privacy. In his den, which he called his "Shangri-La", he spent time reading books and listening to the radio. Muni died of a heart disorder in Montecito, California, in 1967, aged 71. He is interred in the Hollywood Forever Cemetery, Hollywood.

Muni has four official Academy Award nominations for Best Actor, winning for "The Story of Louis Pasteur" (1936) and receiving official nominations for "The Valiant" (1929), "The Life of Emile Zola" (1937), and "The Last Angry Man" (1959). His nomination for the film "I Am a Fugitive from a Chain Gang" (1932) is unofficial. The reason for this being that at the 2nd Academy Awards, no acting nominees were announced, only the Best Actor and Actress winners were announced, with the Academy Awards official site stating "Although not official nominations, the additional names in each category, according to in-house records, were under consideration by various boards of judges". Muni's performance in "Black Fury" was not nominated for an Oscar (see note below filmography).


Referring to his childhood during the Great Depression, Hawkeye Pierce in the “Hawkeye” episode of the television series "M*A*S*H*", said, “You knew where you stood in those days. Franklin Roosevelt was always president, Joe Louis was always the champ, and Paul Muni played everybody.” 

Muni and George Raft appeared as characters in the fifth season of "Boardwalk Empire", meeting with Capone to discuss the film "Scarface".




</doc>
<doc id="67943" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67943" title="Paul Scofield">
Paul Scofield

David Paul Scofield CH CBE (21 January 1922 – 19 March 2008) was an English actor of stage and screen who was known for his striking presence, distinctive voice, and for the clarity and effortless intensity of his delivery. Regarded as one of the greatest Shakespearean actors of all time, Scofield preferred the stage over film. This, and his decision to put his family first, has meant that he has never been as well known outside the United Kingdom as some other actors.

Outside his homeland, Scofield is best known for his Academy, Golden Globe, and BAFTA Award- winning performance as Sir Thomas More in the 1966 film "A Man for All Seasons". Scofield had originally played the same part on stage in the West End and in a Tony Award-winning performance on Broadway.

Actress Helen Mirren, who appeared with Scofield in the 1989 film "When the Whales Came", said of him, "He aspires to the soul rather than the character. He has no sense of personal ambition. He's one of our great, great actors. We're lucky to have him."

In 1990, actor and filmmaker Mel Gibson, who played Scofield's son in Franco Zeffirelli's "Hamlet", compared the experience to being "thrown into the ring with Mike Tyson."

Paul Scofield was born in Birmingham, Warwickshire, England, the son of Mary and Edward Harry Scofield. When Scofield was a few weeks old, his family moved to Hurstpierpoint, Sussex, where his father served as the headmaster at the Hurstpierpoint Church of England School. Scofield told his biographer, Garry O'Connor, that his upbringing was divided. His father was an Anglican and his mother a Roman Catholic. Baptised into his mother's faith, Scofield said, "some days we were little Protestants and, on others, we were all devout little Catholics." He added, "A lack of direction in spiritual matters is still with me."

Scofield recalls, "I was a dunce at school. But at the age of twelve I went to Varndean School at Brighton where I discovered Shakespeare. They did one of his plays every year, and I lived just for that."

In 1939, Scofield left school at the age of seventeen and began training at the Croydon Repertory Theatre. Shortly after the outbreak of the Second World War, Scofield arrived for a physical examination and was ruled unfit for service in the British Army. He later recalled, "They found I had crossed toes. I was unable to wear boots. I was deeply ashamed."

Scofield began his stage career in 1940 with a debut performance in American playwright Eugene O'Neill's "Desire Under the Elms" at the Westminster Theatre, and was soon being compared to Laurence Olivier. He played at the Old Rep in Birmingham. From there he went to the Shakespeare Memorial Theatre in Stratford, where he starred in Walter Nugent Monck's 1947 revival of "Pericles, Prince of Tyre".

Also in 1947, Scofield appeared as Hamlet at the Royal National Theatre alongside a then unknown Claire Bloom as Ophelia. In her later book, "", Bloom recalls that during the production she had a serious crush on Scofield. As Scofield was happily married and the father of a son, Bloom hoped only "to be flirted with and taken some notice of." She later recalled, "I could never make up my mind which of my two Hamlets I found the more devastating: the openly homosexual, charismatic Helpmann, or the charming, shy young man from Sussex."

When asked about Claire Bloom decades later, Scofield recalled, "Sixteen years old I think – so very young and necessarily inexperienced, she looked lovely, she acted with a daunting assurance which belied entirely her inexperience of almost timid reticence. She was a very good Ophelia."

Scofield's versatility at the height of his career is exemplified by his starring roles in theatrical productions as diverse as the musical "Expresso Bongo" (1958) and Peter Brook's celebrated production of "King Lear" (1962).

In his memoir "Threads of Time", director Peter Brook wrote about Scofield's versatility:
The door at the back of the set opened, and a small man entered. He was wearing a black suit, steel-rimmed glasses and holding a suitcase. For a moment we wondered who this stranger was and why he was wandering onto our stage. Then we realised that it was Paul, transformed. His tall body had shrunk; he had become insignificant. The new character now possessed him entirely.

In a career devoted chiefly to the classical theatre, Scofield starred in many Shakespeare plays and played the title role in Ben Jonson's "Volpone" in Peter Hall's production for the Royal National Theatre (1977). Highlights of his career in modern theatre include the roles of Sir Thomas More in Robert Bolt's "A Man for All Seasons" (1960); Charles Dyer in Dyer's play "Staircase", staged by the Royal Shakespeare Company in 1966; the definitive Laurie in John Osborne's "A Hotel in Amsterdam" (1968); and Antonio Salieri in the original stage production of Peter Shaffer's "Amadeus" (1979).

He was subsequently the voice of the Dragon in another play by Robert Bolt, a children's drama "The Thwarting of Baron Bolligrew." "Expresso Bongo", "Staircase" and "Amadeus" were filmed with other actors, but Scofield starred in the screen versions of "A Man for All Seasons" (1966) and "King Lear" (1971).

Other major screen roles include the Art-obsessed Nazi colonel Von Waldheim in "The Train" (1964), Strether in a 1977 TV adaptation of Henry James's novel "The Ambassadors", Tobias in Edward Albee's "A Delicate Balance" (1973), Professor Moroi in the film of János Nyíri's "If Winter Comes" (1980), for BBC Television; Mark Van Doren in Robert Redford's film "Quiz Show" (1994), and Thomas Danforth in Nicholas Hytner's film adaptation (1996) of Arthur Miller's "The Crucible".

According to the DVD extras documentary for the film "The Shooting Party" (1985), in the very first shot of the very first day of filming, all the male lead actors, including Paul Scofield, who was playing Sir Randolph Nettleby, were to come into shot on a horse-drawn shooting brake driven by the renowned film horse-master George Mossman. As they turned the first corner, the plank that Mossman was standing on broke in two and he was hurled forward and down, falling between the sets of wheels and taking the reins with him. He was struck by a horse's hoof and concussed. The horses shied and broke into a gallop.

Rupert Frazer admitted that he was the first to jump off, landing safely, but bruised. Out of control, the horses turned to the right when confronted by a stone wall, causing the shooting brake to roll completely, catapulting the actors into a pile of scaffolding that had been stacked next to the wall. Robert Hardy stood up and realised to his amazement that he was unhurt. He looked across to see Edward Fox stand up, "turn completely green and collapse in a heap". He had broken five ribs and his shoulder-blade. He noticed that Paul Scofield was lying very still on the ground "and I saw that his shin-bone was sticking out through his trousers". As the film takes place in October during the partridge-shooting season, the filmmakers had to make a choice whether to delay filming for a year or re-cast. James Mason had just finished filming "Doctor Fischer of Geneva" for the BBC. The "Shooting Party" schedule was changed to allow him to take over the part of Sir Randolph Nettleby six weeks later. His broken leg also deprived Scofield of the part of O'Brien in "Nineteen Eighty-Four," in which he was replaced by Richard Burton.

Scofield was appointed Commander of the Order of the British Empire (CBE) in the 1956 New Year Honours. He won the Academy Award for Best Actor for "A Man for All Seasons" and was nominated as Best Supporting Actor for "Quiz Show". Theatrical accolades include a 1962 Tony Award for "A Man for All Seasons".

In 1969, Scofield became the sixth performer to win the Triple Crown of Acting, winning an Emmy Award for Outstanding Single Performance by an Actor in a Leading Role for "Male of the Species".

He was also one of only eight actors to win both the Tony and the Oscar for the same role on stage and film, for "A Man for All Seasons".

Scofield declined the honour of a knighthood on three occasions, but was appointed CBE in 1956 and became a Companion of Honour in 2001. In 2002 he was awarded the honorary degree of D. Litt by the University of Oxford.

When asked the reason for his decision to decline the knighthood, Scofield responded, "I have every respect for people who are offered [a knighthood] and accept it gratefully. It is just not an aspect of life that I would want." Gary O'Connor described being knighted as, "The kind of honour from which [Scofield] instinctively recoiled. Never the actor before the part he plays."

In 2004, a poll of actors of the Royal Shakespeare Company, including Ian McKellen, Donald Sinden, Janet Suzman, Ian Richardson, Antony Sher and Corin Redgrave, acclaimed Scofield's Lear as the greatest Shakespearean performance ever. Scofield appeared in many radio dramas for BBC Radio 4, including in later years plays by Peter Tinniswood: "On the Train to Chemnitz" (2001) and "Anton in Eastbourne" (2002). The latter was Tinniswood's last work and was written especially for Scofield, an admirer of Anton Chekhov. He was awarded the 2002 Sam Wanamaker Prize.

Paul Scofield married actress Joy Parker in October 1942. They had met while he played Hamlet to her Ophelia. Scofield later said, "Joy and I simply decided to be married, we were both of age and were determined. Any doubts from our families were overruled and they were the usual ones – too young, etc. We had a week out at the end of "The Moon Is Down" tour, married during that week, and went straight into the Whitehall Theatre."

Paul and Joy Scofield had two children: Martin (born 1945) who became a Senior Lecturer in English and American literature at the University of Kent and Sarah (born 1951). When asked by Garry O'Connor how he wished to be remembered, Scofield responded, "If you have a family, that is how to be remembered." Filmmaker Michael Winner once described the Scofields as, "one of the few very happily married couples I've ever met."

Scofield died from leukemia on 19 March 2008 at the age of 86 at a hospital near his home in rural Sussex, England. His memorial service was held at Westminster Abbey on 19 March 2009. His wife Joy died four years later on 7 November 2012, aged 90.

Paul Scofield led the cast in several dramas issued by Caedmon Records:

Also:
(For a more exhaustive list, see this note:)



</doc>
<doc id="170975" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=170975" title="Peter Finch">
Peter Finch

Frederick George Peter Ingle Finch (28 September 191614 January 1977) was an English-Australian actor. He is best remembered for his role as "crazed" television anchorman Howard Beale in the film "Network", which earned him a posthumous Academy Award for Best Actor, his fifth Best Actor award from the British Academy of Film and Television Arts, and a Best Actor award from the Golden Globes. He was the first of two persons to win a posthumous Academy Award in an acting category, and coincidentally also the first of the two Australian actors to have done so, the other being Heath Ledger.

Finch was born as Frederick George Peter Ingle Finch in London to Alicia Gladys Fisher. At the time, Alicia was married to George Finch.

George Finch was born in New South Wales, Australia, but was educated in Paris and Zürich. He was a research chemist when he moved to Britain in 1912 and later served during the First World War with the Royal Army Depot and the Royal Field Artillery. In 1915, at Portsmouth, Hampshire, George married Alicia Fisher, the daughter of a Kent barrister. However, George Finch was not Peter Finch's biological father. He learned only in his mid-40s that his biological father was Wentworth Edward Dallas "Jock" Campbell, an Indian Army officer, whose adultery with Finch's mother was the cause of George and Alicia's divorce, when Peter was two years old. Alicia Finch married Jock Campbell in 1922.

George gained custody of Peter, who was taken from his biological mother and brought up by his adoptive paternal grandmother, Laura Finch (formerly Black) in Vaucresson, France. In 1925 Laura took Peter with her to Adyar, a theosophical community near Madras, India, for a number of months, and the young boy lived for a time in a Buddhist monastery. Undoubtedly as a result of his childhood contact with Buddhism Finch always claimed to be a Buddhist. He is reported to have said: "I think a man dying on a cross is a ghastly symbol for a religion. And I think a man sitting under a bo tree and becoming enlightened is a beautiful one."

In 1926 he was sent to Australia to live with his great-uncle Edward Herbert Finch at Greenwich Point in Sydney. He attended the local school until 1929, then North Sydney Intermediate High School for three years. A school friend was RAF pilot and author Paul Brickhill.

After graduating, Finch went to work as a copy boy for the Sydney "Sun" and began writing. However he was more interested in acting, and in late 1933 appeared in a play, "Caprice", at the Repertory Theatre.

In 1934–35 he appeared in a number of productions for Doris Fitton at the Savoy Theatre, some with a young Sumner Locke Elliott. He also worked as a sideshow spruiker at the Sydney Royal Easter Show, in vaudeville with Joe Cody and as a foil to American comedian Bert le Blanc. At age 19 Finch toured Australia with George Sorlie's travelling troupe.

He did radio acting work with Hugh Denison's BSA Players (for Broadcasting Service Association, later to become Macquarie Players). He came to the attention of Australian Broadcasting Commission radio drama producer Lawrence H. Cecil, who was to act as his coach and mentor throughout 1939 and 1940. He was "Chris" in the Children's Session and the first Muddle-Headed Wombat.

He later starred with Neva Carr Glyn in an enormously popular series by Max Afford as husband-and-wife detectives "Jeffery and Elizabeth Blackburn" as well as other ABC radio plays.

Finch's first screen performance was in the short film "The Magic Shoes" (1935), an adaptation of the "Cinderella" fairy tale, where Finch played Prince Charming.

He made his feature film debut in "Dad and Dave Come to Town" (1938), playing a small comic role for director Ken G. Hall. His performance was well received and Hall subsequently cast Finch in a larger role in "Mr. Chedworth Steps Out" (1939), supporting Cecil Kellaway.

Finch appeared in a war propaganda film, "The Power and the Glory" (1941), playing a fifth columnist.

Finch enlisted in the Australian Army on 2 June 1941. He served in the Middle East and was an anti-aircraft gunner during the Bombing of Darwin.

During his war service Finch was given leave to act in radio, theatre and film. He appeared in a number of propaganda shorts, including "Another Threshold" (1942), "These Stars Are Mine" (1943), "While There is Still Time" (1943) and "South West Pacific" (1943), the latter for Ken G. Hall. He also appeared in two of the few Australian feature films made during the war, "The Rats of Tobruk" (1944) and the less distinguished "Red Sky at Morning" (1944).

Finch produced and performed Army Concert Party work, and in 1945 toured bases and hospitals with two Terence Rattigan plays he directed, "French Without Tears" and "While the Sun Shines". He narrated the widely seen documentaries "Jungle Patrol" (1944) and "Sons of the Anzacs" (1945).

Finch was discharged from the army on 31 October 1945 at the rank of sergeant.

After the war, Finch continued to work extensively in radio and established himself as Australia's leading actor in that medium, winning Macquarie Awards for best actor in 1946 and 1947. He also worked as a compere, producer and writer.

In 1946, Finch co-founded the Mercury Theatre Company, which put on a number of productions in Sydney over the next few years (initially in the diminutive St James' Hall), as well as running a theatre school.

Finch continued to appear in the (rare) Australian feature films made around this time including "A Son is Born" (1946) and "Eureka Stockade" (1949). He was a leading contender to play Sir Charles Kingsford-Smith in "Smithy" (1946) but lost out to Ron Randell.

Finch was also involved in some documentaries, narrating the legendary "Indonesia Calling" (1946) and helping make "Primitive Peoples" about the people of Arnhem Land.

Laurence Olivier and Vivien Leigh toured Australia in 1948 with the Old Vic Company. They attended Mercury production of "The Imaginary Invalid" on the factory floor of O'Brien's Glass Factory starring Finch. Olivier was impressed with Finch's acting and encouraged him to move to London, his birthplace. He left Australia for good in 1948.

When Finch arrived in Britain, Olivier became his mentor and put him under long-term contract. His first big break was being cast in James Bridie's play "Daphne Laureola" at the Old Vic supporting Edith Evans. This was a significant critical and commercial success and established Finch in London immediately.

He was soon cast in his first British movie, playing a murderous actor in "Train of Events" (1949). Critic C. A. Lejeune praised his work in the London "Observer" commenting that he "adds good cheekbones to a quick intelligence and is likely to become a cult, I fear." "The Scotsman" said "he should be regarded as one of the most hopeful recruits to the British screen."

He had a small role as an Australian prisoner of war in "The Wooden Horse" (1950), the third most popular film at the British box office in 1950. His performance as a Pole in "Daphne Laureola" led to his casting as a Polish soldier in "The Miniver Story", the sequel to the wartime morale boosting film "Mrs. Miniver"; unlike its predecessor, it was poorly received critically.

During this time, Finch continued to appear on stage in various productions while under contract to Olivier. Finch's closeness to the Olivier family led to an affair with Olivier's beautiful but increasingly unstable wife, Vivien Leigh, which began in 1948, and continued on and off for several years, ultimately falling apart due to her deteriorating mental condition.

Finch played Iago onstage in 1951 opposite Orson Welles as the lead in "Othello".

In 1952 he performed at St James's Theatre, King Street, London, in Sir Laurence Olivier's and Gilbert Miller's "The Happy Time" a comedy by Samuel Taylor. He played the part of Papa.

Despite his stage experience, Finch, like his mentor Olivier, had stage fright, and as the 1950s progressed he worked increasingly in film.

Finch's film roles increased in size and prestige through the early 1950s. For Walt Disney he played the Sheriff of Nottingham in "The Story of Robin Hood and His Merrie Men" (1952). He was given two good roles in films from Alexander Korda: as Richard D'Oyly Carte in "The Story of Gilbert and Sullivan" (1953), and as a priest in "The Heart of the Matter" (1953), from the Graham Greene novel.

Then he had one of his best film parts, being cast as the villain Flambeau in "Father Brown" (1954), opposite Alec Guinness in the title role. He also narrated a documentary "The Queen in Australia".

In 1953 he appeared in his first Hollywood movie, "Elephant Walk" (1954), shot in Sri Lanka and Los Angeles. The circumstances of production were turbulent; filming started with Vivien Leigh in the lead but she had a nervous breakdown during production and had to be replaced by Elizabeth Taylor. The experience helped sour Finch on a Hollywood career and he would only work occasionally there for the rest of his career.

On his return to England, Finch played another villain, in the medieval swashbuckler "The Dark Avenger" (1955), opposite Errol Flynn.

Towards the end of 1954 Finch's contract with Laurence Olivier was about to expire and he instead signed a seven-year contract with the Rank Organisation worth £87,500 to make one film a year for them. "We are going to build Peter into a major British star", said Earl St. John, Rank's head of production, at the time.
Finch's first roles for Rank under the new arrangement gave him star parts but were, on the whole, undistinguished: "Make Me an Offer" (1954), "Simon and Laura" (also 1954), "Josephine and Men" (1955), and "Passage Home" (also 1955).

However, he was then cast as an Australian soldier in "A Town Like Alice" (1956), which became the third most popular film at the British box office in 1956 and won Finch a BAFTA for Best Actor. He followed it with "The Battle of the River Plate" (1956), playing Captain Hans Langsdorff. This was also successful financially and British exhibitors voted Finch the seventh most popular British star at the box office for 1956.

Finch returned to Australia to make "The Shiralee" (1957), one of his favourite parts, and the tenth most popular movie at the British box office that year. He followed it with another Australian story, the bushranger tale "Robbery Under Arms" (1957), which did less well. However exhibitors still voted Finch the third most popular British star of 1957, and the fifth most popular overall, regardless of nationality.

His next two films for Rank were not particularly successful: "Windom's Way" (1957), where he played a doctor caught up in the Malayan Emergency, and "Operation Amsterdam" (1959), a war time diamond thriller.

Finch's career received a boost when Fred Zinnemann cast him opposite Audrey Hepburn in "The Nun's Story" (1959). This was an enormous financial and critical success and established Finch's reputation internationally.

For Disney he played Alan Breck in a version of "Kidnapped" (1960). He then received great acclaim for his performance as Oscar Wilde in "The Trials of Oscar Wilde" (1960), winning another BAFTA; the film however was not popular.

Finch co-wrote and directed an award-winning short film, "The Day" (1960) and announced plans to direct a feature but it did not eventuate. He won his third BAFTA for Best Actor for "No Love for Johnnie" (1961), although like "Oscar Wilde", the film lost money. He was originally chosen to play Julius Caesar in "Cleopatra" (1963) and filmed scenes in London, but when the film was postponed he withdrew; the role was recast with Rex Harrison.

Finch made a series of unsuccessful Hollywood films: "The Sins of Rachel Cade" (1961), an attempt to repeat the success of "The Nun's Story", with Angie Dickinson; then two for director Robert Stevens at MGM: "I Thank a Fool" (1962) and "In the Cool of the Day" (1963).

Finch restored his critical reputation with two highly acclaimed British films: "The Pumpkin Eater" (1964) and "Girl with Green Eyes" (1964). He had an uncredited cameo in "First Men in the Moon" (1964), then had a good role in tough adventure film for Robert Aldrich, "The Flight of the Phoenix" (1965).

Finch's next three films saw him support notable female stars: Sophia Loren in "Judith" (1966), Melina Mercouri in "" (1966) and Julie Christie in "Far from the Madding Crowd" (1967). He was reunited with Aldrich for "The Legend of Lylah Clare" (1968). "The Red Tent" (1970) was an expensive international adventure film, with Finch as Umberto Nobile.

Finch's career received another boost when Ian Bannen dropped out of the lead in "Sunday Bloody Sunday" (1971). Finch replaced him and his performance was rewarded with another BAFTA for Best Actor and an Oscar Nomination.

The momentum of this was lost somewhat by "Something to Hide" (1972) and the disastrous musical remake of "Lost Horizon" (1973). He played Lord Nelson in "Bequest to the Nation" (1973) and an opportunistic financier in "England Made Me" (1973). "The Abdication" (1974) was an unsuccessful historical drama.

Finch was asked if he wanted to audition for the part of news presenter Howard Beale in "Network" (1976), written by Paddy Chayefsky and directed by Sidney Lumet. The audition was successful and Finch played the role. The movie was his biggest commercial and critical hit in years.

He then played Yitzhak Rabin in "Raid on Entebbe" (1977).

Shortly after "Raid on Entebbe" finished shooting, Finch undertook a promotional tour for "Network". On 13 January 1977 he appeared on "The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson". The day after, he had a heart attack in the lobby of the Beverly Hills Hotel and died at the age of 60. He is interred in the Hollywood Forever Cemetery.

Finch was nominated for an Oscar for "Network" and went on to posthumously win the award, which was accepted by his widow, Eletha Finch. Although James Dean, Spencer Tracy and Massimo Troisi were also posthumously nominated for a Best Actor Oscar, Peter Finch was the first actor to have won the award posthumously, as well as the first Australian actor to win a Best Actor award. He was the only posthumous winner of an Oscar in an acting category until Heath Ledger won the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor in 2009 (there were many earlier posthumous Oscar winners in non-acting categories; Ledger was also an Australian). Finch also won five Best Actor awards from the British Academy of Film and Television Arts (BAFTA), including one for "Network".

Shortly before he died, Finch told a journalist:
We all say we're going to quit occasionally... I'd like to have been more adventurous in my career. But it's a fascinating and not ignoble profession. No one lives more lives than the actor. Movie making is like geometry and I hated maths. But this kind of jigsaw I relish. When I played Lord Nelson I worked the poop deck in his uniform. I got extraordinary shivers. Sometimes I felt like I was staring at my own coffin. I touched that character. There lies the madness. You can't fake it.

Finch was married three times. In 1943, he married Romanian-born French ballerina Tamara Tchinarova; they worked together on a number of films. They had a daughter, Anita, born in 1950. They divorced in 1959, after she discovered his affair with actress Vivien Leigh in California. He then married South African-born actress Yolande Turner (née Yolande Eileen Turnbull); they had two children together, Samantha and Charles Peter. During their marriage, Finch had an affair with the singer Shirley Bassey. Finch and Turner divorced in 1965. In 1972 Finch married Mavis "Eletha" Barrett, who was known as Eletha Finch. They had a daughter together, Diana.

In 1954, the Australian journalist and author George Johnston wrote a well-researched series of biographical articles on Finch, his life, and his work, which appeared in the Sydney "Sun-Herald" on four consecutive Sundays, which were certainly the first detailed account of Finch's life to be published. Finch later provided the inspiration for the character Archie Calverton in Johnston's novel, "Clean Straw for Nothing".

In 1980, American author Elaine Dundy published a biography of Finch titled "Finch, Bloody Finch: A Biography of Peter Finch". That year, his second wife, Yolande Finch, also published a posthumous account of their life together, "Finchy: My Life with Peter Finch". Another biography had previously been published by his friend and colleague Trader Faulkner, in 1979.

According to an entry in Brian McFarlane's "The Encyclopedia of British Film", republished on the British Film Institute's Screenonline website, Finch "did not emerge unscathed from a life of well-publicised hell-raising, and several biographies chronicle the affairs and the booze, but a serious appraisal of a great actor remains to be written."

A profile of Finch on the British Film Institute's Screenonline website asserts that "it is arguable that no other actor ever chalked up such a rewarding CV in British films."








</doc>
<doc id="53505" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53505" title="Ray Milland">
Ray Milland

Ray Milland (born Alfred Reginald Jones, 3 January 1907
– 10 March 1986) was a Welsh actor and film director. His screen career ran from 1929 to 1985, and he is best remembered for his Academy Award-winning portrayal of an alcoholic writer in "The Lost Weekend" (1945), a sophisticated leading man opposite a corrupt John Wayne in "Reap the Wild Wind" (1942), the murder-plotting husband in "Dial M for Murder" (1954), and as Oliver Barrett III in "Love Story" (1970).

Before becoming an actor, Milland served in the Household Cavalry of the British Army, becoming a proficient marksman, horseman, and aeroplane pilot. He left the army to follow a career in acting and appeared as an extra in several British productions before getting his first major role in "The Flying Scotsman" (1929). This led to a nine-month contract with MGM, and he moved to the United States, where he appeared as a stock actor. After being released by MGM, he was picked up by Paramount, which used Milland in a range of lesser speaking parts, normally as an English character. He was lent to Universal for a film called "Three Smart Girls" (1936), and its success had Milland given a lead role in "The Jungle Princess" (also 1936) alongside new starlet Dorothy Lamour. The film was a big success and catapulted both to stardom. Milland remained with Paramount for almost 20 years, and in addition to his Oscar-winning role in "The Lost Weekend", he is also remembered for the films "The Major and the Minor" (1942), "The Big Clock" (1948), and "The Thief" (1952), the last of which had him nominated for his second Golden Globe. After leaving Paramount, he began directing, and ended his career moving into television.

Milland, who was at one time Paramount Pictures' highest paid actor, co-starred alongside many of the most popular actresses of the time, including Gene Tierney, Grace Kelly, Lana Turner, Marlene Dietrich, Ginger Rogers, Jane Wyman, Loretta Young, and Veronica Lake.

Milland was born on 3 January 1907 in Neath, Wales, the son of Elizabeth Annie (née Truscott) and Alfred Jones, a steel mill superintendent.. Commenting about his parents' personalities, Milland wrote in his 1974 autobiography "Wide-Eyed in Babylon": 

With regard to Milland's early education, he was schooled independently before attending the private King's College School in Cardiff. He also worked at his uncle's horse-breeding farm before leaving home at the age of 21.

Prior to becoming an actor, Milland served in the Household Cavalry. An expert shot, he became a member of his company's rifle team, winning many prestigious competitions, including the Bisley Match in England. While stationed in London, Milland met dancer Margot St. Leger, and through her was introduced to American actress Estelle Brody. Brody queried Milland's commitment to an army career, which led to Milland buying himself out of the forces in 1928 in the hope of becoming an actor.

His first appearance on film was as an uncredited extra on the E.A. Dupont film "Piccadilly" (1929). After some unproductive extra work, which never reached the screen, he signed with a talent agent named Frank Zeitlin on the recommendation of fellow actor Jack Raine. His prowess as a marksman earned him work as an extra at the British International Pictures studio on Arthur Robison's production of "The Informer" (1929), the first screen version of the Liam O'Flaherty novel. While he was working on "The Informer", he was asked to test for a production being shot on a neighbouring stage. Milland made a favourable impression with director Castleton Knight, and was hired for his first acting role as Jim Edwards in "The Flying Scotsman" (also 1929). In his autobiography, Milland recalls that on this film set, he was suggested to adopt a stage name, and he chose Milland from the "mill lands" area of his Welsh home town of Neath.

His work on "The Flying Scotsman" resulted in him being granted a six-month contract, in which Milland starred in two more Knight-directed films, "The Lady from the Sea" and "The Plaything" (both 1929). Believing that his acting was poor, and that he had won his film roles through his looks alone, Milland decided to gain some stage work to improve his art. After hearing that club owner Bobby Page was financing a touring company, Milland approached him in hope of work. He was given the role of second lead, in a production of Sam Shipman and Max Marcin's "The Woman in Room 13". Despite being released from the play after five weeks, Milland felt that he had gained valuable acting experience.

In between stage work, Milland was approached by MGM vice-president Robert Rubin, who had seen the film "The Flying Scotsman". MGM offered Milland a nine-month contract, based in Hollywood, and he accepted, leaving the United Kingdom in August 1930. MGM started Milland out as a 'stock' player, selecting him for small speaking parts in mainstream productions. Milland's first introduction to a Hollywood film resulted in a humiliating scene on the set of "Son of India" (1931), when the film's director Jacques Feyder berated Milland's acting in front of the entire crew. Despite this setback, the studio executives talked Milland into staying in Hollywood, and in 1930, he appeared in his first US film "Passion Flower". Over the next two years, Milland appeared in minor parts for MGM, as well as a few films lent to Warner Bros., often uncredited. His largest role during this period was as Charles Laughton's nephew in "Payment Deferred" (1932). While in this first period working in the United States, Milland met Muriel Frances Weber, whom he always called "Mal", a student at the University of Southern California. Within eight months of first meeting, the two were married on 30 September 1932 at the Riverside Mission Inn. The couple had a son, Daniel, and a daughter, Victoria (adopted). Shortly after "Payment Deferred", Milland found himself out of work when MGM failed to renew his contract. He spent five months in the US attempting to find further acting work, but after little success, and a strained relationship with his father-in-law, he decided to head back to Britain hoping that two years spent in Hollywood would lead to roles in British films. Milland cashed in his contracted first-class return ticket to Britain and found an alternative cheaper way back home. Muriel remained in the States to finish her studies, and Milland found temporary accommodation in Earl's Court in London.

Milland found life in Britain difficult with little regular work, though he finally found parts in two British films, "This is the Life" and "Orders is Orders" (both 1933). Neither was a breakthrough role. Then, in 1933, Roosevelt's reforms to the American banking sector led to a temporary weakness in the dollar, allowing Milland to afford a return to the United States. He returned to California, and found a small flat on Sunset Boulevard, promising Muriel that he would buy a home once he was financially stable. With little prospect of finding acting work, Milland took on menial jobs, including working for a bookie. He decided to find regular employment and through connections made in his time in the UK, he was offered the role of an assistant manager of a Shell gas station on Sunset and Clark. On his return from his successful Shell interview, he passed by the gates of Paramount Pictures, where he was approached by casting director Joe Egli. Paramount was filming the George Raft picture "Bolero" (released in February 1934), but an injury to another British actor had left the studio looking for an urgent replacement. Egli offered Milland a two-week contract, at ten times the salary the assistant job would pay. Milland took the acting role.
After completing "Bolero", Milland was offered a five-week guarantee by Benjamin Glazer to work on an upcoming screwball comedy starring Bing Crosby and Carole Lombard entitled "We're Not Dressing" (also 1934). During filming, he appeared in a scene with George Burns and Gracie Allen, which Milland recalls as falling into an "ad-libbed shambles", which he felt was better than the original script. The film's director Norman Taurog was so impressed, he rang the chief production executive and suggested that Milland be placed on a long-term contact. After a short meeting, Milland was offered a seven-year deal with Paramount. The contract gave Milland a secure income, and Muriel and he moved into an apartment on Fountain Avenue.

During his first contract with Paramount, Milland was used as part of the speaking cast, but never as a top-of-the-bill actor. He was contacted by Joe Pasternak, who was looking for an 'English' actor for the lead in his new picture, "Three Smart Girls" (1936). Although Pasternak worked for Universal Studios, Paramount had agreed to lend Milland out for the film. Milland was lent to Universal for "Next Time We Love" (also 1936), with James Stewart and Margaret Sullavan. On returning to Paramount after "Three Smart Girls" was wrapped, Milland was again cast in bit-part roles. He was then used as a test actor to find a new starlet for "The Jungle Princess" (also 1936). When the studio chose Dorothy Lamour for the lead, Milland wrote in his autobiography that Lamour was confused to find that he was not to be her male lead and she requested Milland to be her co-star. Paramount was not keen, but when "Three Smart Girls" was released to rave reviews, they gave Milland the role. By the end of 1936, Milland was being considered for leading roles, and Paramount rewrote his contract, resulting in the tripling of his salary.

The highly successful "The Jungle Princess" launched Lamour's career and was followed by two further films in the same genre, "Her Jungle Love" and "Tropic Holiday" (both 1938), which also feature Milland.

After returning from a break in Europe, Milland was cast as Captain Hugh "Bulldog" Drummond in "Bulldog Drummond Escapes" (1937). This was followed by another lead role in "Gilded Lily", directed by Wesley Ruggles, who had started Milland out in "Bolero". A heavy workload followed with Milland completing "Ebb Tide" (1937) for Paramount and a couple of loan-outs to Universal and Columbia Pictures. These were followed by "Hotel Imperial" (1939) in which Milland suffered a near-fatal accident on the set. One scene called for him to lead a cavalry charge through a small village. An accomplished horseman, Milland insisted upon doing this scene himself. As he was making a scripted jump on the horse, his saddle came loose, sending him flying straight into a pile of broken masonry. Milland awoke in hospital, where he remained for a week with a badly damaged left hand, a three-inch gash to his head, and a concussion. In the same period, Milland appeared as John Geste in "Beau Geste" alongside Gary Cooper and Robert Preston and "Everything Happens at Night" (both 1939) with Sonja Henie for 20th Century Fox.

According to Milland, a second injury to his left hand occurred in 1939. As well as horse-riding, Milland enjoyed piloting aircraft and in his early career would lend out single-seater planes. As a contracted starring actor, Paramount had insisted he give up this hobby. Instead, Milland took up woodworking and outfitted a machine shop at the back of his newly built house. While operating a circular blade, he slipped, catching one of his hands on the saw. The injury resulted in Milland losing a part of his thumb and severely damaging his tendons. Milland believed that the injury left him with only 50% usage of his hand, but within weeks of the incident, he flew to Britain to star in "French Without Tears". By the time he returned to America, war was declared in Europe. The year finished with the news that Muriel was pregnant with their son Daniel.
Milland appeared in a selection of romantic comedies and dramas alongside some of the leading ladies of the time in films released in 1940, including "Irene" opposite Anna Neagle, "Arise, My Love" with Claudette Colbert, and "Untamed" with Patricia Morison. When the United States entered the Second World War, Milland tried to enlist in the U.S. Army Air Forces, but was rejected because of his impaired left hand. He worked as a civilian flight instructor for the Army, and toured with a United Service Organisation South Pacific troupe in 1944.

As the Second World War continued, Milland found himself now appearing in more action-orientated pictures. He starred as a wannabe pilot in "I Wanted Wings" (1941) with Brian Donlevy and William Holden. This was followed by Cecil B. DeMille's "Reap the Wild Wind" (1942) alongside John Wayne.

Milland appeared in the all-star musical "Star Spangled Rhythm" (1943), in which he appeared as himself singing "If Men Played Cards as Women Do" alongside Fred MacMurray, Franchot Tone, and Lynne Overman. He also made an appearance in the collaborative drama "Forever and a Day". He appeared in the supernatural film "The Uninvited" and the Fritz Lang film noir production "Ministry of Fear" (both 1944).

The pinnacle of Milland's career and acknowledgment of his serious dramatic abilities came when he starred in "The Lost Weekend" (1945). Milland recalled how after returning from an emcee engagement in Peru, he found a book delivered to his home, with a note from Paramount's head of production Buddy DeSylva, which read "Read it. Study it. You're going to play it." Milland found the book unsettling and felt that its subject matter, that of an alcoholic writer, challenging and alien to him. He was also concerned that it would require 'serious acting', something that he believed he had not undertaken to that point in his career. The film was to be produced by Charles Brackett and directed by Billy Wilder, the two men also collaborating to write the screenplay. Milland had already worked with both men, having starred in the comedy "The Major and the Minor" (1942), and he was excited by their involvement. 

Milland's first concern with taking on the role of Don Birnam in "The Lost Weekend" was that he might overact and look amateurish. After a shambolic attempt to act parts of the script while actually drunk, Milland quickly realized that he needed to understand alcoholism. After the cast and crew had arrived on location in New York, Milland was allowed to spend a night in a psychiatric ward of Bellevue Hospital, where the patients were suffering from alcoholism and delirium tremens. He found the experience extremely disturbing and left at three in the morning. Milland lost eight pounds for the role and spoke with the book's author Charles R. Jackson to gain insight into the illness. After the external shots in New York were complete, in which hidden cameras were used to capture Milland walking the streets, the crew returned to Hollywood. Milland found the set work far more challenging, knowing that the close-ups would give his acting no place to hide. Between the strain of acting and the morbidity of the subject, Milland's home life deteriorated and he left for a period of two weeks. When the shoot was over, Muriel and he left for a vacation in Canada.

Returning to filming, Milland was assigned to a historical drama called "Kitty". This was followed by a romantic caper "The Well-Groomed Bride" opposite Olivia de Havilland. Many of the crew members on "The Well-Groomed Bride" had also worked on "The Lost Weekend", and Milland recalled an encounter with a sound mixer, who told him he had seen a rough cut of "Weekend" and that not only was Milland a sure nomination for an Academy Award, but he thought he would win. Milland had not considered himself worthy of an award, but over the next few months, he thought of little else, and was desperate to be nominated. After the first preview, reaction was mixed, with Brackett stating that they had produced "something really worthwhile". Milland found the feedback to his role congratulatory but hushed, leading him to feel the film would bomb as a piece of cinema and would be seen as a social document. When the film was released in New York, the favourable reviews took the studio by surprise. Milland was lauded and he not only won that year's Academy Award for Best Actor, but also the Cannes Film Festival Award for Best Actor, the National Board of Review Award for Best Actor, and the New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Actor. He was the first Welsh actor to win an Oscar and when he collected the award from Ingrid Bergman, he gave one of the shortest acceptance speeches of any Oscar winner. His performance was so convincing, Milland was beleaguered for years by rumours that he actually was an alcoholic. The actor claimed he was not.

Milland's success in "The Lost Weekend" resulted in his contract being rewritten, and he became Paramount's highest-salaried actor. When the film was premiered across Europe, Milland was sent to attend each opening. When he appeared in Cardiff, the largest city in Wales, he was given the key to the city.

Milland continued in his role as lead man after his Oscar win, and stayed contracted to Paramount until the early 1950s. In the late 1940s, he appeared opposite Marlene Dietrich in "Golden Earrings" and Teresa Wright in "The Trouble with Women" (both 1947). During the same period, he starred in four John Farrow pictures, "California" (also 1947), "The Big Clock" (1948), "Alias Nick Beal" (1949), and "Copper Canyon". He also worked with George Cukor, who directed him in "A Life of Her Own" (1950) alongside Lana Turner.

Milland gave a strong performance in "Close to My Heart" (1951), starring with Gene Tierney as a couple trying to adopt a child. Also around this time, he was directed by Jacques Tourneur in "Circle of Danger" (also 1951), set in the United Kingdom; it was the only time he filmed in his home country of Wales. In "The Thief" (1952), his role was without dialogue, and for which he was nominated for a Golden Globe. He starred opposite Grace Kelly and Robert Cummings in Alfred Hitchcock's "Dial M for Murder" (1954), originally shot in three dimensions. Although never admitted by either, rumours were rife at the time that Kelly and Milland were engaged in an affair, fuelled by notorious gossip columnist Hedda Hopper.

After leaving Paramount, Milland concentrated on directing. His first, a Western entitled "A Man Alone" (1955) centres around the aftermath of a stagecoach robbery. This was followed by "Lisbon", a crime drama starring Maureen O'Hara and Claude Rains. Both films were distributed by Republic Pictures. Due to his experience as a film director, he achieved much success directing for television. He also made many television appearances. He starred from 1953 to 1955 with Phyllis Avery and Lloyd Corrigan in the CBS sitcom "Meet Mr. McNutley" in the role of a college English and later drama professor at fictitious Lynnhaven College. The programme was renamed in its second season as "The Ray Milland Show". From 1959 to 1960, Milland starred in the CBS detective series "Markham", but the show failed to capture an audience, though it followed the western "Gunsmoke".

In 1966, Milland took the lead in the Broadway play "Hostile Witness" directed by Reginald Denham. The play ran from February until July of that year, and in 1968, he reprised his role of Simon Crawford, Q.C., in a film of the same title, which he also directed.

He made few films in the early 1960s. He appeared in two Roger Corman pictures; the first was "The Premature Burial" (1962) – the third of Corman's 'Poe Cycle'. He followed this as Dr. Xavier in "" (1963). The third of these was his self-directed, apocalyptic science-fiction drama "Panic in Year Zero!". He returned as a film character actor in the late 1960s and the 1970s, in such films as "Daughter of the Mind" (1969), in which he was reunited with Gene Tierney, and in the role of Oliver Barrett III, in both "Love Story" (1970) and its sequel "Oliver's Story" (1978).

In the late 1960s, Milland hosted rebroadcasts of certain episodes of the syndicated Western anthology series, "Death Valley Days" under the title "Trails West"; the series' original host had been Ronald Reagan. He also turned in an appearance as a hand surgeon in the "Night Gallery" episode "The Hand of Borgus Weems". Toward the end of his life, Milland appeared twice as Jennifer Hart's father in ABC's "Hart to Hart", with Robert Wagner and Stefanie Powers. He starred in two episodes of "Columbo", in 1971, "Death Lends a Hand" and in 1972, "The Greenhouse Jungle", as the murderer. He guest-starred as Sire Uri in the pilot episode of the original "Battlestar Galactica" television series.

In 1975, Milland was the subject of an episode of the British biographical TV series "This Is Your Life".

Milland was married to Muriel Frances Weber, from 1932 until his death in 1986. They had a son, Daniel (b. 1940), and an adopted daughter, Victoria. Milland had an affair with co-star Grace Kelly while filming "Dial M for Murder".

Milland's son Daniel appeared in several minor acting roles in the 1960s. He died in March 1981, at the age of 41, in an apparent suicide. A rifle was found next to him on his bed and he had a wound to his head.

Milland became a naturalized American citizen in the 1940s. He supported the Republican Party and announced his support for Richard Nixon in the 1968 presidential election..

Milland died at the age of 79 of lung cancer at the Torrance Memorial Medical Center in Torrance, California, on 10 March 1986. In line with his instructions, no funeral was held. His body was cremated, and its ashes were scattered into the Pacific Ocean at Redondo Beach, California.




</doc>
<doc id="99019" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=99019" title="Rex Harrison">
Rex Harrison

Sir Reginald Carey "Rex" Harrison (5 March 1908 – 2 June 1990) was an English actor of stage and screen. Harrison began his career on the stage in 1924. He served in the Royal Air Force during World War II, reaching the rank of flight lieutenant. He won his first Tony Award for his performance as Henry VIII in the play "Anne of the Thousand Days" in 1949. He won his second Tony for the role of Professor Henry Higgins in the stage production of "My Fair Lady" in 1957. He reprised the role for the 1964 film version, which earned him both a Golden Globe Award and Academy Award for Best Actor.

In addition to his stage career, Harrison also appeared in numerous films, including "Anna and the King of Siam" (1946), "The Ghost and Mrs. Muir" (1947), "Cleopatra" (1963), and played the title role of the English doctor who talks to animals, "Doctor Dolittle" (1967). In July 1989, Harrison was knighted by Queen Elizabeth II. In 1975, Harrison released his first autobiography. His second, "A Damned Serious Business: My Life in Comedy", was published posthumously in 1991. Harrison was married six times and had two sons: Noel and Carey Harrison. He continued working in stage productions until shortly before his death from pancreatic cancer in June 1990 at the age of 82.

Harrison was born at Derry House in Huyton, Lancashire, the son of Edith Mary (née Carey) and William Reginald Harrison, a cotton broker. He was educated at Liverpool College.
After a bout of childhood measles, Harrison lost most of the sight in his left eye, which on one occasion caused some on-stage difficulty. He first appeared on the stage in 1924 in Liverpool. Harrison's acting career was interrupted during World War II while serving in the Royal Air Force, reaching the rank of Flight Lieutenant. He acted in various stage productions until 11 May 1990. He acted in the West End of London when he was young, appearing in the Terence Rattigan play "French Without Tears", which proved to be his breakthrough role.

He alternated appearances in London and New York in such plays as "Bell, Book and Candle" (1950), "Venus Observed", "The Cocktail Party", "The Kingfisher" and "The Love of Four Colonels", which he also directed. He won his first Tony Award for his appearance at the Shubert Theatre as Henry VIII in Maxwell Anderson's play "Anne of the Thousand Days" and international superstardom (and a second Tony) for his portrayal of Henry Higgins in the musical "My Fair Lady", where he appeared opposite Julie Andrews.

Later appearances included Pirandello's "Henry IV", a 1984 appearance at the Haymarket Theatre with Claudette Colbert in Frederick Lonsdale's "Aren't We All?", and one on Broadway at the Brooks Atkinson Theatre presented by Douglas Urbanski, at the Haymarket in J. M. Barrie's "The Admirable Crichton" with Edward Fox. He returned as Henry Higgins in the revival of "My Fair Lady" directed by Patrick Garland in 1981, cementing his association with the plays of George Bernard Shaw, which included a Tony nominated performance as Shotover in "Heartbreak House", Julius Caesar in "Caesar and Cleopatra", and General Burgoyne in a Los Angeles production of "The Devil's Disciple".

Harrison's film debut was in "The Great Game" (1930), other notable early films include "The Citadel" (1938), "Night Train to Munich" (1940), "Major Barbara" (1941), "Blithe Spirit" (1945), "Anna and the King of Siam" (1946), "The Ghost and Mrs. Muir" (1947), and "The Foxes of Harrow" (1947). He was best known for his portrayal of Professor Henry Higgins in the 1964 film version of "My Fair Lady", based on the eponymous Broadway production (which in turn was based on George Bernard Shaw's play "Pygmalion"), for which Harrison won a Best Actor Oscar.

He also starred in 1967's "Doctor Dolittle". At the height of his box office clout after the success of "My Fair Lady", Harrison proved a domineering and demanding force during production, demanding auditions for prospective composers after musical playwright Leslie Bricusse was contracted and demanding to have his singing recorded live during shooting, only to agree to have it rerecorded in post-production. He also disrupted production with incidents with his wife, Rachel Roberts and deliberate misbehaviour, such as when he deliberately moved his yacht in front of cameras during shooting in St. Lucia and refused to move it out of sight due to contract disputes. Harrison was at one point temporarily replaced by Christopher Plummer, until he agreed to be more cooperative.

He starred in the 1968 comedy "The Honey Pot", a modern adaptation of Ben Jonson's play "Volpone". Two of his co-stars, Maggie Smith and Cliff Robertson, were to become lifelong friends. Both spoke at his New York City memorial at the Little Church Around the Corner when Harrison died in 1990.

Harrison was not by any objective standards a singer (his "talking on pitch" style he used in "My Fair Lady" would be adopted by many other classically trained actors with limited vocal ranges); the music was usually written to allow for long periods of recitative, or "speaking to the music". Nevertheless, "Talk to the Animals", which Harrison performed in that film, won the Academy Award for Best Original Song in 1967.

Despite excelling in comedy (Noël Coward described him as "The best light comedy actor in the world—except for me."), he attracted favourable notices in dramatic roles such as his portrayal of Julius Caesar in "Cleopatra" (1963) and as Pope Julius II in "The Agony and the Ecstasy" (1965), opposite Charlton Heston as Michelangelo. He also acted in a Hindi film "Shalimar" alongside Indian Bollywood star Dharmendra as well as appearing as an ageing homosexual man opposite Richard Burton as his lover in "Staircase" (1969).
Harrison was married six times. In 1942, he divorced his first wife, Colette Thomas, and married actress Lilli Palmer the next year; they later appeared together in numerous plays and films, including "The Four Poster".

In 1947, while married to Palmer, Harrison began an affair with actress Carole Landis. Landis committed suicide in 1948 after spending the evening with Harrison. Harrison's involvement in the scandal by waiting several hours before calling a doctor and police briefly damaged his career and his contract with Fox was ended by mutual consent. Harrison and Palmer divorced in 1957.

In 1957, Harrison married the actress Kay Kendall. Kendall died of myeloid leukaemia in 1959. Terence Rattigan's 1973 play "In Praise of Love" was written about the end of this marriage, and Harrison appeared in the New York production playing the character based on himself. Rattigan was said to be "intensely disappointed and frustrated" by Harrison's performance, as "Harrison refused to play the outwardly boorish parts of the character and instead played him as charming throughout, signalling to the audience from the start that he knew the truth about [the] illness." Critics however were quite pleased with the performance and although it did not have a long run, it was yet another of Harrison's well-plotted naturalistic performances.

He was subsequently married to Welsh-born actress Rachel Roberts from 1962 to 1971. In 1980, despite his having married twice since their divorce, Roberts made a final attempt to win Harrison back, which proved to be futile; she committed suicide that same year.

Harrison then married Elizabeth Rees-Williams, divorcing in 1975, and finally in 1978, Mercia Tinker, who would become his sixth and final wife. Harrison's eldest son Noel Harrison became an olympic skier, singer and occasional actor; he toured in several productions including "My Fair Lady" in his father's award-winning role. Noel died suddenly of a heart attack on 19 October 2013 at age 79. Rex's younger son Carey Harrison is a playwright and social activist.

Harrison's sister Sylvia was married to David Maxwell Fyfe, a lawyer, Conservative politician and judge who was successively the lead British prosecutor at Nuremberg, Home Secretary and Lord Chancellor (head of the English judiciary); after his death she married another Cabinet minister, Lord de la Warr.

Chronology of Harrison's six marriages:

Grandchildren:

Harrison owned properties in London, New York City and Portofino, Italy. His villa in Portofino was named "San Genesio" after the patron saint of actors.

Having retired from films after "A Time to Die", Harrison continued to act on Broadway and the West End until the end of his life, despite suffering from glaucoma, painful teeth, and a failing memory. He was nominated for a third Tony Award in 1984 for his performance as Captain Shotover in the revival of George Bernard Shaw's "Heartbreak House". He followed with two successful pairings with Claudette Colbert, "The Kingfisher" in 1985 and "Aren't We All?" in 1986. In 1989, he appeared with Edward Fox in "The Admirable Crichton" in London. In 1989/90, he appeared on Broadway in "The Circle" by W. Somerset Maugham, opposite Glynis Johns, Stewart Granger, and Roma Downey. The production opened at Duke University for a three-week run followed by performances in Baltimore and Boston before opening 14 November 1989 on Broadway.

Harrison died of pancreatic cancer at his home in Manhattan on 2 June 1990 at the age of 82. He had only been diagnosed with the disease a short time before. The stage production in which he was appearing at the time, "The Circle", came to an end upon his death.

He was cremated and some of his ashes were scattered in Portofino and the rest were scattered at his second wife Lilli Palmer's grave at Forest Lawn Memorial Park in Glendale, California, in the Commemoration section, Map 1, Lot 4066, Space 2.

Harrison's second autobiography, "A Damned Serious Business: My Life in Comedy" (), was published posthumously in 1991.

Rex Harrison has two stars on the Hollywood Walk of Fame, one at 6906 Hollywood Boulevard for his contribution to films, and the other at 6380 Hollywood Boulevard for his contribution to television. Harrison is also a member of the American Theater Hall of Fame. He was inducted in 1979.

Seth MacFarlane, creator of the animated series "Family Guy", modelled the voice of the character Stewie Griffin after Harrison, after seeing him in the film adaptation of "My Fair Lady".





</doc>
<doc id="61258" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61258" title="Rod Steiger">
Rod Steiger

Rodney Stephen "Rod" Steiger (April 14, 1925July 9, 2002) was an American actor, noted for his portrayal of offbeat, often volatile and crazed characters. Cited as "one of Hollywood's most charismatic and dynamic stars", he is closely associated with the art of method acting, embodying the characters he played, which at times led to clashes with directors and co-stars. He starred as Marlon Brando's mobster brother Charlie in "On the Waterfront" (1954), the title character Sol Nazerman in "The Pawnbroker" (1964), and as police chief Bill Gillespie opposite Sidney Poitier in the film "In the Heat of the Night" (1967) which won him the Academy Award for Best Actor.

Steiger was born in Westhampton, New York, the son of a vaudevillian. He had a difficult childhood, with an alcoholic mother from whom he ran away at the age of 16. After serving in the South Pacific Theater during World War II, he began his acting career with television roles in 1947, and went on to garner critical acclaim for his portrayal of the main character in the teleplay "Marty" (1953). He made his stage debut in 1946, in a production of "Curse you, Jack Dalton!" at the Civic Repertory Theatre of Newark, and subsequently appeared in productions such as "An Enemy of the People" (1950), Clifford Odets's "Night Music" (1951), "Seagulls Over Sorrento" (1952) and "Rashomon" (1959).

Steiger made his film debut in Fred Zinnemann's "Teresa" in 1951, and subsequently appeared in films such as "The Big Knife" (1955), "Oklahoma!" (1955), "Across the Bridge" (1957) and "Al Capone" (1959). After Steiger's performance in "The Pawnbroker" in 1964, in which he played an embittered Jewish Holocaust survivor working as a pawnbroker in New York City, he portrayed an opportunistic Russian politician in David Lean's "Doctor Zhivago" (1965). "In the Heat of the Night" (1967) won five Academy Awards, including Best Picture and Best Actor for Steiger, who was lauded for his performance as a Mississippi police chief who learns to respect an African-American officer (Poitier) as they search for a killer. The following year, he played a serial killer of many guises in "No Way to Treat a Lady".

During the 1970s, Steiger increasingly turned to European productions in his search for more demanding roles. He portrayed Napoleon Bonaparte in "Waterloo" (1970), a Mexican bandit in Sergio Leone's "Duck, You Sucker!" (1971), Benito Mussolini in "Last Days of Mussolini" (1975), and ended the decade playing a disturbed priest in " The Amityville Horror" (1979). By the 1980s, heart problems and depression took its toll on Steiger's career, and he found it difficult to find employment, agreeing to appear in low-budget B movies. One of his final roles was as judge H. Lee Sarokin in the prison drama "The Hurricane" (1999), which reunited him with "In the Heat of the Night" director Norman Jewison. Steiger was married five times, and had a daughter, opera singer Anna Steiger, and a son, Michael Steiger. He died of pneumonia and kidney failure as a result of complications from surgery for a gall bladder tumor on July 9, 2002, aged 77, in Los Angeles, and was survived by his fifth wife Joan Benedict Steiger.

Steiger was born on April 14, 1925 in Westhampton, New York, the only child of Lorraine (née Driver) and Frederick Steiger, of French, Scottish and German descent. Rod was raised as a Lutheran. He never knew his father, a vaudevillian who had been part of a traveling song-and-dance team with Steiger's mother, but was told that he was a handsome Latino-looking man, who was a talented musician and dancer. Biographer Tom Hutchinson describes him as a "shadowy, fugitive figure", one who "haunted" Rod throughout his life and was an "invisible presence and unseen influence".

Hutchinson described Steiger's mother as "plump, energetic and small, with long auburn hair". She had a good singing voice and nearly became a Hollywood actress, but after a leg surgery permanently impaired her walking ability, she gave up acting and turned to alcohol. As a result, she quit show business and moved away from Westhampton to raise her son. They moved through several towns, including Irvington and Bloomfield, before settling in Newark, New Jersey. Her alcoholism caused Steiger much embarrassment, and the family was frequently mocked by other children and their parents within the community. At the age of five he was sexually abused by a pedophile who lured him in with a butterfly collection. Steiger said of his troubled family background: "If you had the choice of having the childhood you experienced, with your alcoholic mother and being the famous actor you are today, or having a loving, secure childhood and not being famous, which would you take? A loving, secure childhood in a New York minute". During the last 11 years of her life, Steiger's mother stayed sober and regularly attended Alcoholics Anonymous meetings. Steiger recalled: "I was so proud of her. She turned herself around. She came alive again".

During his childhood, and owing to his considerable strength and bulk, Steiger became known as "The Rock". Despite being mocked over his mother's alcoholism, he was a popular figure at school and an able softball player. He displayed an interest in writing poetry and acting during his adolescent years, and appeared in several school plays while at West Side High School in Newark. Tired of fighting with his mother, he ran away from home at age sixteen to join the United States Navy during World War II. He enlisted on May 11, 1942, and received his training at the U.S. Naval Training Station in Newport, Rhode Island. He joined the newly commissioned USS "Taussig" (DD-746) on May 20, 1944. While serving as a torpedoman on destroyers, he saw action in the South Pacific, including the Battle of Iwo Jima. Steiger later commented: "I loved the Navy. I was stupid enough to think I was being heroic". His experiences during the war haunted him for the rest of his life, particularly the loss of Americans during the Battle of Iwo Jima, as well as the sinking of vessels by the "Taussig" which were known to have women and children aboard. On December 17, 1944, off the coast of Luzon in the Philippines, Steiger and the "Taussig" encountered a severe typhoon, which became known as "Halsey's Typhoon", with winds reaching one hundred knots (115 mph) and waves. As a result, three U.S. destroyers were lost, but the "Taussig" survived, with Steiger tying a rope to himself on deck and flattening himself as waves engulfed the ship.

After the war, the GI Bill paid for his rent at a room on West 81st Street in New York City, an income of just over $100 a month, and four years of schooling. He initially found a job oiling machines and washing floors. He decided to attend a drama class, primarily because of its membership of attractive young women. Known as the Civil Service Little Theater group, it was conducted by the Office of Dependants and Beneficiaries, where he was employed at the time. This led him to start a two-year course at the New School for Social Research, run by German émigré Erwin Piscator. During one audition, Steiger was cast after barely uttering a few words, the director exclaiming he had a "fresh, wonderful quality". Another talented pupil at the time was Walter Matthau, who dubbed the institution "The Neurotic School for Sexual Research". Steiger was surprised to discover his own talent as an actor, and he was encouraged to pursue further studies at the Dramatic Workshop. One of the main reasons he wanted to be an actor was to regain public respect for his family name, which had so humiliated him during childhood. Another important factor was his belief that he did not "have the temperament for a regular job", and would have ended up a miserable, violent alcoholic. His only role model as an actor was Paul Muni, who he thought was "the greatest", though he also had a deep respect for French actor Harry Baur and, according to biographer Hutchinson, he admired Charlie Chaplin "to the point of adoration".

Steiger made his stage debut in a production of "Curse you, Jack Dalton!" (1946) at the Civic Repertory Theatre of Newark. Subsequent to this, he received an invitation from one of his teachers, Daniel Mann, to attend the Actors Studio, established by Elia Kazan in October 1947. It was here, along with Marlon Brando, Karl Malden and Eli Wallach, that he studied method acting, which became deeply engrained in him. Lacking matinée idol looks, much like Malden and Wallach, he began pursuing a career as a character actor rather than as a leading man. Steiger's stage work continued in 1950, with a minor role as a townperson in a stage production of "An Enemy of the People" at the Music Box Theatre. His first major role on Broadway came in Clifford Odets's production of "Night Music" (1951), where he played A. L. Rosenberger. The play was held at the ANTA Playhouse. The following year, he played a telegraphist in the play "Seagulls Over Sorrento", performed at the John Golden Theatre beginning on September 11, 1952.

Steiger's early roles, although minor, were numerous, especially in television series during the early 1950s, when he appeared in more than 250 live television productions over a five-year period. He was spotted by Fred Coe, NBC's manager of program development, who increasingly gave him bigger parts. Steiger considered television to be what repertory theatre had been for an earlier generation, and saw it as a place where he could test his talent with a plethora of different roles. Soon afterward he began receiving positive reviews from critics such as John Crosby, who noted that Steiger regularly gave "effortless persuasive performances". Among Steiger's credits were "Danger" (1950–53), "Lux Video Theatre" (1951), "Out There" (1951), "Tales of Tomorrow" (1952–53), "The Gulf Playhouse" (1953), "Medallion Theatre" (1953), "Goodyear Television Playhouse" (1953), and as Shakespeare's Romeo in "The First Command Performance of Romeo and Juliet (1957)" episode of "You Are There" in 1954, under director Sidney Lumet. He continued to make appearances in various playhouse television productions, appearing in five episodes of "Kraft Theatre" (1952–54), which earned him praise from critics, six episodes of "The Philco Television Playhouse" (1951–55) and two episodes of "Schlitz Playhouse of Stars" (1957–58). Steiger made his big screen debut in 1953, with a small role in Fred Zinnemann's "Teresa", shot in 1951. Steiger, who described himself as "cocky", won over Zinnemann by praising his direction. Zinnemann recalled that Steiger was "very popular, extremely articulate and full of remarkable memories", and the two remained highly respectful of each other for life.

On May 24, 1953, Steiger played the title role in Paddy Chayefsky's "Marty" episode of the Goodyear Television Playhouse. The role had originally been intended for Martin Ritt, who later became a director. "Marty" is the story of a lonely and homely butcher from the Bronx in search of love. The play was a critical success that increased Steiger's public exposure; Tom Stempel noted that he brought "striking intensity to his performance as Marty, particularly in giving us Marty's pain". As Steiger refused to sign a seven-year studio contract, he was replaced with Ernest Borgnine in the film "Marty" (1955), which won the Academy Award for Best Picture, as well as the Best Actor Oscar for Borgnine. 1953 proved to be Steiger's breakthrough year; he garnered Sylvania Awards for "Marty" and four other best performances of the year—as Vishinsky and Rudolph Hess in two episodes of "You Are There", as gangster Dutch Schultz in a thriller, and as a radar operator in "My Brother's Keeper".

For his role as Charley "the Gent", the brother of Marlon Brando's character in Elia Kazan's "On the Waterfront" (1954), Steiger was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor. Film writer Leo Braudy wrote that the "incessantly repeated images of its taxicab confrontation between Brando and Rod Steiger have made the film iconic". The taxicab scene took eleven hours to shoot and was heavily scripted, despite Brando fuelling the popular myth in his autobiography that the scene was improvised. Brando stated that seven takes were needed because Steiger could not stop crying, which Steiger found to be unfair and inaccurate. Though Steiger retained great respect for Brando as an actor, he disliked him as a person and frequently complained during the production of Brando's "predilection for leaving the set" immediately after shooting his scenes. Steiger later remarked: "We didn't get to know each other at all. He always flew solo and I haven't seen him since the film. I do resent him saying he's just a hooker, and that actors are whores". Steiger also responded unfavorably when he learned that Kazan had been awarded an honorary Oscar by the Academy in 1999. In a 1999 interview with "BBC News", Steiger said he probably would not have done "On the Waterfront" if he had known at the time that Kazan provided the House Un-American Activities Committee with names of performers suspected of being Communists.

Steiger played Jud Fry in the film version of the Rodgers and Hammerstein musical "Oklahoma!" (1955), in which he performed his own singing. It was one of the biggest location film productions of the 1950s, shot near Nogales, Arizona with a crew of 325 people and some 70 trucks. Steiger portrayed a disturbed, emotionally isolated version of Jud, which television channel Turner Classic Movies (TCM) believed brought a "complexity to the character that went far beyond the stock musical villain". Steiger observed that James Dean, who auditioned for the role that went to Gordon MacRae, was a "nice kid absorbed by his own ego, so much so that it was destroying him", which he thought led to his death. Dean reportedly gave Steiger his prized copy of Ernest Hemingway's book "Death in the Afternoon", and had underlined every appearance of the word "death".

Later in 1955, Steiger played an obnoxious film tycoon, loosely based on Columbia boss Harry Cohn, opposite Jack Palance and Ida Lupino in Robert Aldrich's film noir "The Big Knife". Steiger bleached his hair for the part, sought inspiration for the role from Russian actor Vladimir Sokoloff, read a book about the Treblinka extermination camp to understand his character thoroughly, and visited the perfume department of a store in Beverly Hills, California, to try to understand his character's contempt for women. Steiger and Palance did not get along during the production, and in one scene Palance threw several record albums at Steiger in frustration, feeling that he was trying to steal the scene. Steiger earned critical acclaim later that year for a role as a prosecuting major in Otto Preminger's "The Court-Martial of Billy Mitchell", alongside Gary Cooper and Charles Bickford.

Steiger portrayed the character "Pinky" in Columbia Pictures' western, "Jubal" (1956), which co-starred Glenn Ford and Ernest Borgnine. Steiger's character is a rancher, a "sneering baddie", who becomes jealous when his former mistress becomes attracted to Ford's character.. Ford noted Steiger's deep commitment to method acting during production, considering him to be a "fine actor but a real strange fellow". Steiger disliked the experience and frequently clashed with director Delmer Daves, who was more favorable to Ford's lighthearted take on the film. Upon its release in April 1956, a writer for "Variety" was impressed with the "evil venom" displayed by his character, and remarked that there had not "been as hateful a screen heavy around in a long time". In Mark Robson's "The Harder They Fall", Steiger played a crooked boxing promoter who hires a sports journalist (Humphrey Bogart in his last role). Steiger referred to Bogart as "a professional" who had "tremendous authority" during filming.

Steiger apperared in three films released in 1957. The first was John Farrow's film noir "The Unholy Wife", in which he played a wealthy Napa Valley vintner who marries a "femme fatale" named Phyllis (Diana Dors). In its original review of the film, "The New York Times" described Steiger's performance as "curious" further stating that the actor's voice modulation "ranges from Marlon Brando to Ronald Colman and back." During the production of Samuel Fuller's "Run of the Arrow", in which he played a confederate veteran who refuses to accept defeat following the surrender of General Robert E. Lee at Appomattox at the end of the American Civil War, Steiger badly sprained his ankle before shooting one of the battle scenes and was unable to walk, let alone run. Fuller instead got one of the Native American extras to run in Steiger's place, which is why the scene was shot showing only the feet, instead of using close-ups. Steiger had researched the history behind the film and decided to play the character as an Irishman, becoming "the first Irish cowboy" as he put it. Later that year, Steiger took the lead role in the British thriller "Across the Bridge", in which he played a German conman with British citizenship who goes into hiding in Mexico after embezzling company funds. Film critic Dennis Schwartz stated that Steiger gave "one of his greatest performances".

Steiger portrayed a mastermind criminal seeking to obtain a $500,000 ransom, opposite James Mason and Inger Stevens, in Andrew L. Stone's "Cry Terror!" (1958) for Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer. Paul Beckley of the "Herald Tribune" had thought Steiger "superbly laconic", but Dennis Schwartz dismissed the film as "an ill-conceived attempt" with "too many coincidences and contrived plot points to sustain interest". The following year, Steiger appeared with Claire Bloom (whom he later married) in a Fay and Michael Kanin stage production of Akira Kurosawa's 1950 film, "Rashomon", where he enacted the role of the bandit originally played by Toshiro Mifune. A major success, it was lauded by critics and nominated for three Tony awards. Robert Coleman of the "Daily Mirror" described Steiger's performance as "magnificently animalish", while Kenneth Tynan of "The New Yorker" thought the acting helped set new standards for Broadway. The same year, Steiger portrayed iconic mobster Al Capone in the film of the same name. Steiger was particularly keen on demonstrating the showiness of Capone, speaking thunderously, slinging a camel-hair coat over his shoulders and wearing his hat at a jaunty angle. The film, noted for its deglamorized portrayal of the subject, earned Steiger a Laurel Award for Best Male Dramatic Performance nomination. Though Hutchinson, author of "Rod Steiger: Memoirs of a friendship", perceived Steiger's portrayal of Capone to be more of a caricature, George Anastasia and Glen Macnow, authors of the book "The Ultimate Book of Gangster Movies", described it as one of the best screen portrayals of Capone.

Following the success of "Al Capone", Steiger played sophisticated thief Paul Mason, who masterminds a caper to steal $4 million in French francs from the underground vault of the casino of Monte Carlo, in the Henry Hathaway heist film "Seven Thieves" (1960). Bosley Crowther of "The New York Times" gave a positive review of the film, praising the "nerve-rackingly delicate plot" and the "most elaborate roles" of Steiger and his co-star, Edward G. Robinson. The following year, he took the part of a prison psychiatrist who tries to cure the psychological demons of Stuart Whitman's character in "The Mark". Steiger's performance was so convincing that, after the film was released, he received a call from a psychiatric institution asking him to attend one of their board meetings. "The Mark" was followed by a role in the European film production of "World in My Pocket" alongside Nadja Tiller. Steiger increasingly played in films in Italy and France during this period. Not only did he believe he had greater credibility and esteem as an actor in Europe, but he approved of the more relaxed filming schedule prevalent there at that time.

In 1962, Steiger appeared on Broadway in "Moby Dick—Rehearsed", at the Ethel Barrymore Theatre, as well as playing a detective searching for a scientist's (Alan Ladd's) mugger in Philip Leacock's "13 West Street" for Columbia Pictures. Steiger played the role of a destroyer commander in the large ensemble cast of "The Longest Day", which included John Wayne, Richard Todd, Robert Mitchum, Richard Burton, Sean Connery and Henry Fonda. According to co-star Richard Burton, Steiger had admitted to him that he was in financial trouble at the time and had had a face lift, which Burton thought made him look like "one half of a naked ass-hole". The following year, Steiger played ruthless Neapolitan land developer and city councilman Edoardo Nottola, who uses his political power to make personal profit in a large scale suburban real estate deal, in Francesco Rosi's Italian production, "Hands over the City" (1963). According to biographer Francesco Bolzoni, Rosi had cast Steiger in the Italian language film because he had wanted "a rich interpreter of great capacity" in the part of the land developer.

Shortly after "Hands over the City", Steiger agreed to appear in another Italian film, "Time of Indifference" (1964), in which he starred opposite Claudia Cardinale and Shelley Winters. Though Steiger's powerful performance was unaffected, the production was marred by a dispute between director Francesco Maselli and producer Franco Cristaldi, with one wanting it to be a purely political film and the other wanting emphasis on the erotic subplot and his relationship with Cardinale. In Sidney Lumet's gritty drama "The Pawnbroker" (1964), Steiger played an embittered, emotionally withdrawn survivor of the Holocaust living in New York City. Richard Harland Smith of TCM notes that Steiger's career was waning at the time, and he had to "scramble for paying gigs for a decade" before getting this part. Steiger agreed to a reduced fee of $50,000. He read Lumet's novel and the script many times to develop an intimate understanding of the character, and insisted on reducing his lines to make his character more realistic and alienated from society. Lumet noted that during the production Steiger had a tendency to be overly dramatic, stating: "Sure, Rod has weaknesses of rhetoric, but you can talk them through with him. I explained that this solitary Jew could not rise to heights of emotion; he had been hammered by life and by people. The faith he had to find was in other people, because God had betrayed him." 

Steiger remarked of the film: "I think my best work is in "The Pawnbroker". The last scene, where I find the boy dead on the street. I think that's the highest moment, whatever it may be, with my talent." He drew upon inspiration for this climactic scene, in which he appears to show his frustration through a silent scream, from Picasso's "Guernica", which depicts war-ravaged villagers. Cecil Wilson of "the Daily Mail" wrote that Steiger's character "seems to encompass all the agony ever inflicted on man". Although the film attracted controversy and was accused of anti-Semitism, Steiger was widely acclaimed for his performance, which garnered him the prize for Best Actor at the Berlin International Film Festival and his second Best Actor nomination at the Oscars. Steiger was so certain that he had produced an Oscar-winning performance that he was shocked when he lost to Lee Marvin.

In 1965, Steiger played an effeminate embalmer in Tony Richardson's comedy "The Loved One", about the funeral business in Los Angeles, based on the 1948 short satirical novel by Evelyn Waugh. His curly-haired appearance in the film was modeled on a bust of Apollo he once saw while meeting Richardson. Steiger offended Bosley Crowther of "The New York Times", who found his character repellent. His next role, as Komarovsky, a Russian politician and "villainous opportunist" who rapes Julie Christie's character in David Lean's "Doctor Zhivago" (1965), was one of his favorites. Steiger, one of only two Americans in the cast, was initially apprehensive about working with such great British actors as Ralph Richardson and Alec Guinness, and was pleased when the film was completed that he did not stand out as an American. The film was the biggest international box office draw of the 1960s, grossing $200 million worldwide. It has since been acclaimed as one of the greatest films ever made, and in 1998 was selected as the 39th best American film in the original AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies list by the American Film Institute.
Steiger had intended returning to the stage, and had signed on to play the title character in Bertolt Brecht's "Galileo", at the Lincoln Center Repertory Company in April 1967, but the production was cancelled when he became ill. Steiger won the Best Actor Oscar for his portrayal of Chief of Police Bill Gillespie in "In the Heat of the Night", opposite Sidney Poitier. He played a Southern police chief searching for a murderer. Prejudiced against blacks, he jumps to the conclusion that the culprit is Virgil Tibbs (Poitier), an African-American man passing through town after visiting his mother, who later turns out to be an experienced homicide detective from Philadelphia. The film deals with the way the two men interact and join forces in solving the crime, as Steiger's Gillespie learns to greatly respect the black man he initially took to be a criminal. Steiger drew upon his experience in the Navy with a Southerner named "King", remembering his accent. Poitier considered Steiger and Spencer Tracy to have been the finest actors he had ever worked with, remarking in 1995, "He's so good he made me dig into bags I never knew I had." A. D. Murphy of "Variety" described Steiger's performance as "outstanding", writing: "Steiger's transformation from a diehard Dixie bigot to a man who learns to respect Poitier stands out in smooth comparison to the wandering solution of the murder." Steiger won a plethora of other awards, including a BAFTA, a Golden Globe, a Laurel Award and awards for Best Actor from the National Society of Film Critics and the New York Film Critics Circle.

In 1968, Steiger played a serial killer opposite George Segal in Jack Smight's black comedy thriller "No Way to Treat a Lady". During the course of the film, he adopts various disguises, including those of a priest, a policeman, a plumber, and a hairdresser, to avoid being identified, and to put his victims at ease, before strangling them and painting a pair of lips on their foreheads with garish red lipstick. The film and Steiger's performance were critically acclaimed, with Vincent Canby of "The New York Times" highlighting Steiger's "beautifully uninhibited performance as a hammy", and a writer for "Time Out" describing him as "brilliant as a sort of Boston strangler, son of a great actress who has left her boy with a mother fixation". Later in 1968, Steiger played a repressed gay non-commissioned officer opposite John Phillip Law in John Flynn's "The Sergeant" for Warner Bros.-Seven Arts, which earned him the David di Donatello Award for Best Foreign Actor. Despite the award win, film critic Pauline Kael of "The New Yorker" was particularly critical of the casting of Steiger as a homosexual and felt that he was "totally outside his range", to which Steiger concurred that he was ineffective.

Steiger was cast as a short-tempered tattooed man with soon-to-be ex-wife Claire Bloom in the science fiction picture "The Illustrated Man" (1969). The film was a critical and commercial failure, and Ray Bradbury, who wrote the screenplay, said: "Rod was very good in it, but it wasn't a good film...the script was terrible". Steiger had better luck alongside Bloom later that year in Peter Hall's British drama "Three into Two Won't Go", playing an Irishman who cheats on his wife with a young hiker. It was entered into the Berlin International Film Festival and became the 19th most popular film at the UK box office in 1969.

Steiger was offered the title role in "Patton" (1970), but turned it down because he did not want to glorify war. The role was then given to George C. Scott, who won the Best Actor Oscar for his performance. Steiger called this refusal his "dumbest career move", remarking, "I got on my high horse. I thought I was a pacifist." Instead, he chose to portray Napoleon Bonaparte opposite Christopher Plummer in Sergei Bondarchuk's "Waterloo" (1970), a co-production between the Soviet Union and Italy. One commentator wrote: "I watched with extraordinary respect, no, that is not the right word, with enthusiasm, the acting of Rod Steiger in the role of Napoleon in Waterloo," while literary critic Daniel S. Burt describes Steiger's Napoleon as an "unusual interpretation", finding him less convincing than Plummer's Wellington.

In 1971, Steiger played a chauvinistic big game hunter, explorer and war hero opposite Susannah York in Mark Robson's "Happy Birthday, Wanda June", before agreeing to star alongside James Coburn as Mexican bandit Juan Miranda in Sergio Leone's "Duck, You Sucker!", which was alternatively titled "A Fistful of Dynamite". Leone was initially dissatisfied with his performance in that he played his character as a serious, Zapata-like figure. As a result, tension grew between Steiger and Leone, including one incident that ended with Steiger walking off during the filming of the scene where Juan's stagecoach is destroyed. After the film's completion, Leone and Steiger were content with the final result, and Steiger praised Leone for his skills as a director. Steiger auditioned for the role of Michael Corleone in Francis Ford Coppola's "The Godfather" (1972), a film adaptation of Italian American author Mario Puzo's 1969 novel of the same name, but Puzo felt that Steiger was too old for the part and rejected him.

Steiger played a rural Tennessee patriarch and brother of Jeff Bridges, at odds with Robert Ryan's character, in "Lolly-Madonna XXX" (1973), which received mixed reviews. Later that year he was cast as the turban-wearing German officer Guenther von Lutz in Duccio Tessari's Italian war comedy "The Heroes", opposite Rod Taylor, and appeared as "foul-mouthed Sicilian mobster" Eugenio Giannini opposite Gian Maria Volontè's Lucky Luciano in Francesco Rosi's film of the same name.

In 1975, Steiger portrayed Italian dictator Benito Mussolini in Carlo Lizzani's "Last Days of Mussolini", which received a positive critical reception. He appeared in Claude Chabrol's French picture "Innocents with Dirty Hands", playing the role of Louis Wormser, the wealthy alcoholic husband of Romy Schneider's character Julie Wormser. It was poorly received by critics, and Steiger found the director, whom he had admired, a bitter disappointment. He was highly critical of Chabrol's lack of communication and aloofness from the production, and preference for playing chess on set instead of talking through scenes. Vincent Canby of "The New York Times" dismissed it as "little more than a soap opera", writing: "The performances are of a piece—uniformly atrocious. Mr. Steiger surpasses his own earlier records for lumbering busyness. Within his first few minutes on screen he (1) gets drunk, (2) whines, (3) pleads for understanding, (4) weeps and (5) goes to bed alone."
Later that year, Steiger starred as an Irish Republican Army terrorist who plans to blow up the Houses of Parliament in Don Sharp's British thriller "Hennessy". John Simon of "New York Magazine" wrote: "This fellow Hennessy, as played by Rod Steiger, is about as interesting and likable as a Guy Fawkes dummy."

The following year, Steiger portrayed the comic actor W. C. Fields in an Arthur Hiller biopic, "W. C. Fields and Me", for Universal Pictures. The screenplay, which was based on a memoir by Carlotta Monti, who was Fields' mistress for the last 14 years of his life, was penned by Bob Merrill. Steiger read extensively about Fields in preparation for the role, and developed an encyclopaedic knowledge of his career and personal life. He concluded that he would base his characterization around his performance in "The Bank Dick" (1940) . One day, Fields' mistress Monti turned up on set, and watched the scene where he briefly thanks everybody. Nervous that she might not approve, he broke down in tears after Monti met him after the scene and fondly said "Woody, Woody, Woody, My Woody", a nickname used only by those very close to Fields. Despite the energy Steiger put into the picture, like the actor's previous recent films, it was poorly received by critics. Canby called it "dreadful" and described Steiger's portrayal of Fields as a "wax dummy of a character". Lucia Bozzola of "The New York Times" later referred to Steiger's portrayal of Fields as "superb", but noted that his Hollywood career had "undeniably fallen from his 1950s and '60s heights".

Steiger played Pontius Pilate in Franco Zeffirelli's TV miniseries "Jesus of Nazareth" (1977). Stacy Keach, who portrayed Barabbas, expressed his joy at the opportunity to work with Steiger, describing him as "generous and opinionated". In 1978, Steiger played a senator in Norman Jewison's "F.I.S.T.", opposite Sylvester Stallone, who played a Cleveland warehouse worker involved in the labor union leadership of the fictional organisation named Federation of Inter-State Truckers. "Love and Bullets", later that year, in which Steiger appeared as a mafia boss, was poorly received; Roger Ebert dismissed it as a "hopelessly confused hodgepodge of chases, killings, enigmatic meetings and separations, and insufferably overacted scenes by Steiger alternating with alarmingly underacted scenes by [Charles] Bronson". The following year, Steiger was cast as a general opposite Richard Burton and Robert Mitchum in Andrew V. McLaglen's war film "Breakthrough", set on the Western Front. In "The Amityville Horror" (1979), Steiger appeared as a disturbed priest, who is invited to perform an exorcism on a haunted house. Again Steiger was accused of overacting; Janet Maslin of "The New York Times" wrote: "Mr. Steiger bellows and weeps and overdoes absolutely everything. He won't even pick up the phone before it's rung 12 or 15 times." Pauline Kael thought that Steiger's "spiritual agony was enough to shatter the camera lens".

In 1980, Steiger received two Genie Award for Best Performance by a Foreign Actor nominations for his roles in "Klondike Fever" and "The Lucky Star", both Canadian productions. "Klondike Fever" is based on Jack London's journey from San Francisco to the Klondike gold fields in 1898. Steiger revisited his role as Mussolini in "Lion of the Desert", a production that was financed by Muammar Gaddafi, and which co-starred Anthony Quinn as Bedouin tribal leader Omar Mukhtar, fighting the Italian army in the years leading up to World War II. The Italian authorities reportedly banned the film in 1982, as it was considered damaging to the army, and it was not shown on Italian television until a state visit by Gaddafi in 2009. It received critical acclaim in Britain, where it was praised in particular for the quality of its battle scenes. Later in 1981, Steiger won the Montréal World Film Festival Award for Best Actor for his portrayal of white-bearded Orthodox rabbi Reb Saunders in Jeremy Kagan's "The Chosen". Janet Maslin commented that Steiger's "slow, rolling delivery" was more "numbing than prepossessing", though a critic from "Variety" thought it an "exceptional performance as the somewhat tyrannical but loving patriarch".

After his open-heart surgery in 1979, clinical depression and health problems during the 1980s directly affected Steiger's career, and he often turned to B-movies, low-budget, independent productions and TV miniseries. He admitted that during this period he accepted "everything I was offered", and knew that many of the films he appeared in were not great, but wanted to demonstrate his strong work ethic despite his issues. He later regretted the poorer films in which he appeared during the 1980s, and wished he had done more stage work. He sank into an even deeper depression when he was not involved in acting, but it bothered him more that his acting career had taken a turn for the worse and was no longer challenging. The major studio producers were wary of his problems and considered him a liability. Steiger spoke about the experience to a younger colleague while advising: "Never tell anyone if you've got heart problems, kid. Never." His reputation as a fine character actor remained intact, and Joel Hirschhorn at the time considered his talent to be "as strong as ever".

In 1984, Steiger starred as a detective assigned to investigate the murder of a Chicago psychoanalyst (Roger Moore), a man whom he detests from a previous case, in Bryan Forbes's "The Naked Face". Richard Christiansen of the "Chicago Tribune" referred to it as a "wimpy suspense movie shot in Chicago in the fall of 1983, [that] doesn't do much good for the city or for anyone connected with it", and considered Steiger to be "acting in his high hysteria gear", who "snarls and whines and overacts". Steiger took a break from cinema in the mid-1980s, during which he appeared in the Yorkshire Television mini-series "The Glory Boys" (1984) with Anthony Perkins, and "Hollywood Wives" (1985) with Angie Dickinson. Steiger and Perkins were at loggerheads during the production of "The Glory Boys". Perkins resented the fact that Steiger insisted on a bigger trailer and felt that Steiger was trying to steal scenes from him, while Steiger had thought Perkins "so jittery and jinxed by the chemicals he was taking" that he felt sorry for him and believed that he was jeopardizing the success of the film. Steiger also performed on Joni Mitchell's 1985 album "Dog Eat Dog", where he provided the voice of an evangelist in the song "Tax Free".

Steiger appeared in the Argentine-American film "Catch the Heat" (1987), a martial arts picture about a Brazilian drug baroness who smuggles drugs into the United States inside her breast implants. According to director Fred Olen Ray, it was pulled from distribution within a week of release. In 1988, Steiger and Yvonne De Carlo played a spooky elderly couple with developmentally delayed children in John Hough's horror film "American Gothic". Universally panned by the critics, Caryn James of "The New York Times" wrote: "Mr. Steiger addresses the camera as if he were reciting Shakespeare, he is truly, straightforwardly, hilariously bad." During the last year of the decade he played authority figures, including a mayor in "The January Man", and as Judge Prescott in "Tennessee Waltz". Although Steiger admitted that his performance in "The January Man" was "way over the top", he enjoyed the experience, thereby marking a positive turning point after a period of clinical depression.

In 1990, Steiger starred in "Men of Respect", a crime drama film adaptation of William Shakespeare's play "Macbeth". He played a character based on King Duncan, opposite John Turturro as Mike Battaglia (Macbeth), who plays a Mafia hitman who climbs his way to the top by killing Steiger's character. The film was critically panned, with Roger Ebert awarding it one star out of four, describing the concept as a "very, very bad idea". Steiger played another mobster, Sam Giancana, two years later in the miniseries "Sinatra" (1992).

Steiger portrayed a reverend living in a small town in the American South in the macabre Merchant Ivory film production "The Ballad of the Sad Café" (1991), co-starring Vanessa Redgrave and Keith Carradine. The film met with generally lukewarm reviews, though it was entered into the 41st Berlin International Film Festival. Steiger auditioned for the part of an elderly Irishman in Ron Howard's "Far and Away", starring Tom Cruise and Nicole Kidman. Steiger, who had long been bald, was ordered by Howard to wear a wig to the audition. He resented the fact that Howard insisted on taping the audition, which he believed to be a form of humiliation for actors, serving as after-dinner entertainment for the Hollywood executives. Steiger never forgave Howard, whom he referred to as a "cocksucker", for rejecting him for the part and giving it to Cyril Cusack.

In 1993, Steiger portrayed an aging gynaecologist who terrorizes his urban neighbors in a rural community in Burlington, Vermont in "The Neighbor". Dennis Schwartz considered it to have been one of Steiger's creepiest roles, though he thought that the poor script had rendered the role awkward and "mildly entertaining in the sense that Steiger is asked to carry the film and hams it up". The following year, Steiger agreed to play a Cuban mob boss opposite Sylvester Stallone and Sharon Stone in Luis Llosa's thriller "The Specialist", citing its purpose as a "$40 million commercial" to show a new generation that he existed. Critics panned the film, which has a four percent approval rating on Rotten Tomatoes based on 27 reviews as of July 2015. The role earned Steiger a Golden Raspberry Award for Worst Supporting Actor nomination, and the film was listed in "The Official Razzie Movie Guide" as one of "The 100 Most Enjoyably Bad Movies Ever Made".

Following "The Specialist" (1994), Steiger appeared in "Tom Clancy's Op Center" (1995), a film that was edited down into a TV miniseries, and featured in a "Columbo" television film, "Strange Bedfellows". The following year, he took a minor role as Doc Wallace in the Dale Rosenbloom family drama "Shiloh". He reprised the role three years later in . Also in 1996, Steiger played a "jingoistic top general" who "petitions the president to go nuclear in the middle of a global crisis" in the ensemble production of "Mars Attacks!".

In 1997, Steiger played Tony Vago, the mob boss of Vincent Gallo's character in Kiefer Sutherland's "Truth or Consequences, N.M.", a gritty "noir" about a drug heist gone wrong. Steiger played judges in Antonio Banderas's comedy-drama "Crazy in Alabama" and in the prison drama, "The Hurricane", both in 1999, the latter of which tells the story of former middleweight boxer Rubin Carter, who was wrongly convicted of a triple homicide in a bar in Paterson, New Jersey. "The Hurricane" reunited Steiger with Norman Jewison, who had directed him in "In the Heat of the Night". Steiger portrayed H. Lee Sarokin, the judge responsible for freeing Carter. Sarokin thought it was a "marvellous film" that was Oscar-worthy, but found Steiger's portrayal as overacted and a "little arrogant and pompous".

After a minor role as a "bombastic priest" in "End of Days" (1999), Steiger was one of the lead actors in Burt Reynolds's "The Last Producer" (2000), a film about a washed-up, veteran producer (Reynolds) who tries to re-enter the movie business by producing a new film. Steiger's last film role was as the billiard hall manager, Nick, in "Poolhall Junkies" (2002); it was poorly received by critics.

Steiger was married five times: he married actress Sally Gracie (1952–1958), actress Claire Bloom (1959–1969), secretary Sherry Nelson (1973–1979), singer Paula Ellis (1986–1997) and actress Joan Benedict Steiger (married 2000 until his death). He had a daughter, opera singer Anna Steiger (born in 1960) by Bloom, and a son, Michael Steiger (born in 1993), from his marriage to Ellis. In an interview with journalist Kenneth Passingham, Steiger stated that Bloom was "all I ever wanted in a woman", and that "maybe our marriage was better than most because we were both established when we met". The couple bought a home in Malibu, California, a community that appealed to Steiger but which Bloom found boring. They also purchased an apartment in Manhattan and a cottage in County Galway, in close proximity to John Huston's home. Financial considerations led Steiger to sell their New York apartment in the mid-1970s. It upset him greatly when his marriage with Bloom ended in 1969 and that she quickly remarried Broadway producer Hillard Elkins the same year, a man whom Steiger had entrusted to care for her while he was away shooting "Waterloo". Steiger was also close friends with actress Elizabeth Taylor.

Steiger was outspoken on McCarthyism. He was particularly critical of Charlton Heston's stance on weapons, and publicly referred to him as "America's favorite fascist". In one clash in a column in the "Los Angeles Times", Steiger responded to a letter sent by Heston saying that he was shocked that the American Film Institute had not honored Elia Kazan because of his testimony to the Un-American Activities Committee. Steiger wrote that he was "appalled, appalled, appalled" at actors and writers who had been forced to drive cabs because they were blacklisted and had even committed suicide as a result. Heston did not reply.

Steiger suffered from depression throughout much of his life. He described himself as "incapacitated for about eight years with clinical depression" before his Oscar win for "In The Heat of the Night". His career problems from the 1970s onwards were often exacerbated by health issues. He underwent open-heart surgery in 1976 and 1979 and struggled with obesity, though certain roles, such as Napoleon, required him to intentionally gain weight. After the decline of his third marriage in 1979, a deep depression, partly a side effect of his surgery, during the 1980s negatively affected his career. He became increasingly reclusive during this period, often confining himself to his apartment, watching American football for several hours. He said of the experience: "You begin to lose self-esteem. You don't walk, you don't shave and if no one was watching you'd go to the bathroom right where you were sitting". He would lie in bed at night thinking "You'll never act again. Why bother? You're no good". Despite these challenges, Steiger continued to act into the 1990s and early 2000s. In one of his final interviews, he stated that there was a stigma wrongfully attached to sufferers of depression and that it was caused by a chemical imbalance, not a mental disease. He commented: "Pain must never be a source of shame. It's a part of life, it's part of humanity."

Steiger died of pneumonia and kidney failure as a result of complications from surgery for a gall bladder tumor on July 9, 2002, in Los Angeles, and was buried in Forest Lawn – Hollywood Hills Cemetery. The film "Saving Shiloh", released in 2006, was dedicated to his memory.

Steiger was one of Hollywood's most respected character actors; Hutchinson described him as "one of Hollywood's most charismatic and dynamic stars". Yet for Hutchinson, Steiger remained "out of sympathy with Hollywood" during his career, believing that accomplished actors often struggle to find challenging films as they got older. Steiger was an "effusive talent" according to Lucia Bozzola of "The New York Times", and was particularly noted for his intense portrayal of offbeat, often volatile and crazed characters. After "On the Waterfront" (1954), Steiger became somewhat typecast for playing tough characters and villains, and grew increasingly frustrated playing the "Mafia heavy or a near-psychopath" during the 1970s, roles which he could play menacingly, but provided little opportunity for him to showcase his talent. Gossip columnist Louella Parsons hailed him as "the Screen's No.1 Bad Man", while the newspaper "London Evening News" referred to him as "the man you would love to hate if you had the coverage". A 1960 publication by Dean Jennings of "The Saturday Evening Post" referred to Steiger as an "angry, hot-tempered newcomer of prodigious acting talents, [who] works best only at emotional white heat", and remarked that he found it "stimulating to carry theatrical fantasy into his private life". Pauline Kael found his performances so powerful that she believed he "often seems to take over a picture even when he isn't in the lead". The journal "Films and Filming", surveying his career in 1971, noted that his talent "developed steadily through films good and bad", and that the secret of his success was that he stayed grounded, citing a 1956 interview where he said "I pity the player who can't keep his feet on the ground. It's too easy to trade on success and forget that no performer can stand still."

A product of the Actors Studio, Steiger is closely associated with method acting, embodying the characters he played. Writer James F. Scott notes that during his career, he "many times put aside his own personality to think his way into an alien psyche". Steiger once said:

Steiger was so devoted to his craft that during the 1970s he turned to many foreign productions, especially in Italy, to obtain the sort of roles he desired, but often clashed with directors over his method acting techniques. In one of his last interviews, Steiger said: "What is the greatest thing an artist in any profession can give to a person?—that would be a constructive, warm memory. Because that gets into your brain and therefore into your life, so to speak. And that's it, when somebody says to me 'I'll never forget', that's worth more to me than five Academy Awards, I'm in that person's life".

Film writer Paul Simpson notes how closely Steiger prepared for his roles, and how he "effortlessly" recreated the mannerisms of figures such as Mussolini, in a "compelling take on an enigmatic figure". Judith Crist of "New York Magazine", reviewing "Duck, You Sucker!", commented that Steiger was "totally without mannerisms, always with manner", and noted that his "silences are stunningly effective". Roger Ebert later echoed this statement, concurring that Steiger lacked mannerisms, writing, "When he gets a character worth playing with, he creates it new from the bottom up, out of whole cloth. I don't know how he does it. It's almost as if he gets inside the skin of the guy he's playing and starts being that person for a while". Steiger said: "I always tried to do things different. If I got a role which was similar to another I'd try to do it a little different." His explosive screen performances were an influence on many later actors, including Robert De Niro, who used Steiger's portrayal of Al Capone as a reference for his own performance in "The Untouchables" (1987). Elvis Presley was highly impressed with Steiger's "powerful and wrenching performance" in "The Pawnbroker".

Despite Steiger's acclaim as an actor, he was frequently accused of overacting and won his fair share of critics, particularly during the 1970s and 1980s. His acting was so dynamic at times that critics found him excessive and overbearing, and even uncomfortable or laughable to watch. Steiger once clashed with Armenian director Rouben Mamoulian, during a theatrical production of "Oklahoma!", as he was intolerant of Steiger's "unusual acting technique". Steiger ignored the director's concerns that he was mumbling his lines, and when he began chomping loudly on an apple during a scene with Gordon MacRae, Mamoulian exclaimed: "Get out of my theater. Get out of my life!", and fired him. Even Kazan found several of the Actors Studio's techniques disagreeable, preferring "more humor and verve and less self-indulgence, self-pity and self-awareness". Kazan felt that Steiger often displayed a competitive edge as an actor and tried to steal scenes from his co-stars. Steiger rejected these claims, insisting that he was merely "trying to take the medium of acting to as far as I can go, and that why I sometimes go over the edge".

Several co-stars found Steiger difficult; Warren Oates, according to director Norman Jewison, viewed Steiger as "somebody who had a tendency to go over the top" during the making of "In The Heat of the Night". Writer Richard Dyer highlights the contrast in the film between the acting styles of Steiger and Poitier, with "Poitier's stillness and implied intensity" and "Steiger's busy, exteriorised method acting". Humphrey Bogart, Steiger's co-star of "The Harder They Fall", referred to Steiger's method acting as the "scratch-your-ass-and-mumble school of acting". Director Robert Aldrich notes that Steiger had a habit of changing his lines, which often confused his co-stars. Aldrich stated: "Usually I lie awake at nights trying to think of ways to improve an actor's performance. With Steiger, the problem is to try and contain him". Steiger was particularly aggressive towards director Kenneth Annakin during the making of "Across the Bridge", insisting on rewriting most of the script and changing many of the lines to better fit Steiger's idea of the character. Annakin stated that he had "never known an actor to put so much thought and preparation into a performance" as Steiger. Hutchinson revealed that Steiger often suffered from panic during filming and that fear of failure haunted him throughout his life, but fear also provided him with a source of strength in his acting.



</doc>
<doc id="142834" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=142834" title="Wallace Beery">
Wallace Beery

Wallace Fitzgerald Beery (April 1, 1885 – April 15, 1949) was an American film actor. He is best known for his portrayal of Bill in "Min and Bill" opposite Marie Dressler, as Long John Silver in "Treasure Island", as Pancho Villa in "Viva Villa!", and his titular role in "The Champ", for which he won the Academy Award for Best Actor. Beery appeared in some 250 movies during a 36-year career. His contract with Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer stipulated in 1932 that he would be paid $1 more than any other contract player at the studio, making him the highest paid actor in the world. He was the brother of actor Noah Beery Sr. and uncle of actor Noah Beery Jr.

For his contributions to the film industry, Beery was posthumously inducted into the Hollywood Walk of Fame with a motion pictures star in 1960. His star is located at 7001 Hollywood Boulevard.

Beery was born in Clay County, Missouri, near Smithville. The Beery family left the farm in the 1890s and moved to nearby Kansas City, Missouri, where the father was a police officer.

Wallace Beery attended the Chase School in Kansas City and took piano lessons as well, but showed little love for academic matters. He ran away from home twice, the first time returning after a short time, quitting school and working in the Kansas City train yards as an engine wiper. Beery ran away from home a second time at age 16, and joined the Ringling Brothers Circus as an assistant elephant trainer. He left two years later, after being clawed by a leopard.

Wallace Beery joined his brother Noah in New York City in 1904, finding work in comic opera as a baritone and began to appear on Broadway as well as summer stock theatre. He appeared in "The Belle of the West" in 1905. His most notable early role came in 1907 when he starred in "The Yankee Tourist" to good reviews.

In 1913, he moved to Chicago to work for Essanay Studios. His first movie was likely a comedy short, "His Athletic Wife" (1913).

Beery was then cast as Sweedie, a Swedish maid character he played in drag in a series of short comedy films from 1914-16. "Sweedie Learns to Swim" (1914) co-starred Ben Turpin. "Sweedie Goes to College" (1915) starred Gloria Swanson, whom Beery married the following year.

Other Beery films (mostly shorts) from this period included "In and Out" (1914), "The Ups and Downs" (1914), "Cheering a Husband" (1914), "Madame Double X" (1914), "Ain't It the Truth" (1915), "Two Hearts That Beat as Ten" (1915), and "The Fable of the Roistering Blades" (1915).

"The Slim Princess" (1915), with Francis X. Bushman, was a feature. Beery did "The Broken Pledge" (1915) and "A Dash of Courage" (1916), both with Swanson.

Beery was a German soldier in "The Little American" (1917) with Mary Pickford, directed by Cecil B. De Mille. He did some comedies for Mack Sennett, "Maggie's First False Step" (1917) and "Teddy at the Throttle" (1917), but he would gradually leave that genre and specialize in portrayals of villains.

In 1917 Beery portrayed Pancho Villa in "Patria" at a time when Villa was still active in Mexico. (Beery reprised the role 17 years later in "Viva Villa!".)

Beery was a villainous German in "The Unpardonable Sin" (1919) with Blanche Sweet. For Paramount he did "The Love Burglar" (1919) with Wallace Reid; "Victory" (1919), with Jack Holt; "Behind the Door" (1919), as another villainous German; and "The Life Line" (1919) with Holt.

Beery was the villain in "813" (1920); "The Virgin of Stamboul" (1920) for director Tod Browning; and "The Mollycoddle" (1920) with Douglas Fairbanks.

Beery returned to comedy with "The Round-Up" (1920) starring Fatty Arbuckle, though Beery was again the villain. He went back to straight villainy in "The Last of the Mohicans" (1920), playing Magua.

Beery had a support part in "The Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse" (1920) with Rudolph Valentino. He was a villainous Tong leader in "A Tale of Two Worlds" (1921) and was the bad guy in "Sleeping Acres" (1922), "Wild Honey" (1922), and "I Am the Law" (1922).

Beery had a then-rare heroic part as King Richard I in "Robin Hood" (1922), starring Douglas Fairbanks in the title role. The movie was a huge hit.

Beery had a cameo in "A Blind Bargain" (1922), and a support role in "The Flame of Life" (1923). He played another historical king, King Philip IV of Spain in "The Spanish Dancer" (1923) with Pola Negri.

Beery starred in an action melodrama, "Stormswept" (1923) for FBO Films alongside his elder brother, Noah Beery Sr..

Beery played his third royal, the Duc de Tours, in "Ashes of Vengeance" (1923) with Norma Talmadge, then did "Drifting" (1923) with Priscilla Dean for director Browning.

Beery had the lead part in "Bavu" (1923). He co-starred with Buster Keaton in the comedy "Three Ages" (1923), the first feature Keaton wrote, produced, directed and starred in.

Beery was a villain in "The Eternal Struggle" (1923), a Mountie drama, which was produced by Louis B. Mayer who would become crucial to Beery's career. He was reunited with Dean and Browning in "White Tiger" (1923), then played the title role in "Richard the Lion-Hearted" (1923), a sequel to "Robin Hood" based on Sir Walter Scott's "The Talisman".

Beery was in "The Drums of Jeopardy" (1923) and had a support role in "The Sea Hawk" (1924) for director Frank Lloyd, and "The Signal Tower" (1925).

Beery signed a contract with Paramount Pictures. He had a support role in "Adventure" (1925) directed by Victor Fleming.

At First National, he was given the star role of Professor Challenger in Arthur Conan Doyle's dinosaur epic "The Lost World" (1925). Beery was top billed in Paramount's "The Devil's Cargo" (1925) for Victor Fleming, and supported in "The Night Club" (1925), "The Pony Express" (1925) for James Cruze, and "The Wanderer" (1925) for Raoul Walsh.

Beery starred in a comedy with Raymond Hatton, "Behind the Front" (1926) and he was a villain in "Volcano!" (1926). He was a bos'n in "Old Ironsides" (1926) for director James Cruze, with Charles Farrell in the romantic lead.

Beery had the title role in the baseball movie "Casey at the Bat" (1927). He was reunited with Hatton in "Fireman, Save My Child" (1927) and "Now We're in the Air" (1927). The latter also featured Louise Brooks who was Beery's co star in "Beggars of Life" (1928), directed by William Wellman, which was Paramount's first part-talkie movie.

There was a fourth comedy with Hatton, "Wife Savers" (1929), then Beery starred in "Chinatown Nights" (1929) for Wellman, produced by a young David O. Selznick and "Stairs of Sand" (1929). He then left Paramount.

Irving Thalberg contracted Beery to Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer as a character actor. The association began well when Beery played the savage convict "Butch", a role originally intended for Lon Chaney Sr. in the highly successful 1930 prison film "The Big House", directed by George W. Hill; Beery was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Actor.

Beery's second film for MGM was also a huge success: "Billy the Kid" (1930) where he played Pat Garrett. He supported John Gilbert in "Way for a Sailor" (1930) and Grace Moore in "A Lady's Morals" (1930), playing P.T. Barnum in the latter.

Beery was well established as a leading man and top rank character actor. What really made him a star was "Min and Bill" (1931) opposite Marie Dressler, and directed by Hill, a huge success.

Beery made a third film with Hill, "The Secret Six" (1931), a gangster film with Jean Harlow and Clark Gable. It was popular but not as much as "The Champ", which Beery made with Jackie Cooper for director King Vidor. The film, especially written for Beery, was a box office sensation. Beery shared the Best Actor Oscar with Fredric March. Though March received one vote more than Beery, Academy rules at the time—since rescinded—defined results within one vote of each other as "ties".

Beery's career went from strength to strength. "Hell Divers" (1932), also starring a young Clark Gable, was a big hit. So too was the all-star "Grand Hotel" (1932), in which Beery was billed fourth, one of the very few times he would not be top billed for the rest of his career. In 1932 his contract with MGM stipulated that he be paid a dollar more than any other contract player at the studio, making him the world's highest paid actor.

Beery was a wrestler in "Flesh" (1932), a minor hit, then was in another all-star ensemble blockbuster, "Dinner at Eight" (1933), with Jean Harlow holding her own as Beery's comedically bickering wife.

Beery was loaned out to the new Twentieth Century Pictures for "The Bowery" (1933), also starring George Raft and Fay Wray, under the direction of Raoul Walsh.

Back at MGM he played the title role of Pancho Villa in "Viva Villa!" (1933) and was reunited with Dressler in "Tugboat Annie" (1933), a massive hit. He was Long John Silver in "Treasure Island" (1934), a box office disappointment.

Beery returned to Twentieth Century Productions for "The Mighty Barnum" (1934) in which he played P.T. Barnum again. Back at MGM he was a kindly sergeant in "West Point of the Air" (1935) and was in an all-star spectacular, "China Seas" (1935), this time billed beneath Clark Gable.

"O'Shaughnessy's Boy" (1935) reunited Beery and Jackie Cooper. He had the lead in MGM's adaptation of "Ah, Wilderness!" (1936) and went back to Twentieth Century - now 20th Century Fox - for "A Message to Garcia" (1936).

At MGM he was in "Old Hutch" (1936) and "The Good Old Soak" (1937) then he was back at Fox for "Slave Ship" (1937).

Beery was in "The Bad Man of Brimstone" (1938), "Port of Seven Seas" (1938), "Stablemates" (1938) with Mickey Rooney, "Stand Up and Fight" (1939) with Robert Taylor, "Sergeant Madden" (1939) with Tom Brown, "Thunder Afloat" (1939), "The Man from Dakota" (1940), and "20 Mule Team" (1940).

"Wyoming" (1940) teamed Beery with Marjorie Main. After "The Bad Man" (1941) MGM reunited Beery and Main in "Barnacle Bill" (1941), "The Bugle Sounds" (1941), and "Jackass Mail" (1942).

Beery did a war film, "Salute to the Marines" (1943) then was back with Main in "Rationing" (1944). "Barbary Coast Gent" (1944), a Western comedy in which Beery played a bombastic con man, teamed him with Binnie Barnes. He did another war film, "This Man's Navy" (1945), then made another Western with Main, "Bad Bascomb" (1946), a huge hit, helped by Margaret O'Brien's casting.

"The Mighty McGurk" (1947) put Beery with another child star of the studio, Dean Stockwell. "Alias a Gentleman" (1947) was the first of Beery's movies to lose money during the sound era. "A Date with Judy" (1949) was a hugely popular musical featuring Elizabeth Taylor. Beery's last film, again featuring Main, "Big Jack" (1949), also lost money.

Beery's first wife was teenaged actress Gloria Swanson; the two had co-starred in "Sweedie Goes to College" (1915) and married in 1916. Although Beery had enjoyed popularity with his "Sweedie" shorts, his career had taken a dip, and during the marriage to Swanson, he relied on her as a breadwinner. According to Swanson's autobiography, Beery raped her on their wedding night, and later tricked her into swallowing an abortifacient when she was pregnant, which caused her to lose their child.

In 1924, Beery married actress Rita Gilman. The couple adopted Carol Ann, daughter of Rita Beery's cousin. Both marriages ended in divorce.
In December 1937, comedic actor Ted Healy was involved in a drunken altercation at Cafe Trocadero on the Sunset Strip. E. J. Fleming, author of "The Fixers: Eddie Mannix, Howard Strickling and the MGM Publicity Machine", asserts that Healy was attacked by three men — future James Bond producer Albert “Cubby” Broccoli, local mob figure Pat DiCicco (who was Broccoli’s cousin as well as the former husband of Thelma Todd and the future husband of Gloria Vanderbilt) and Wallace Beery. Fleming writes that this beating led to Healy's death a few days later.
In December 1939, the unmarried Beery adopted a seven-month-old infant girl Phyllis Ann. Phyllis appeared in MGM publicity photos when adopted, but was never mentioned again. Beery told the press he had taken the girl in from a single mother, recently divorced, but he had filed no official adoption papers. 

Beery was considered misanthropic and difficult to work with by many of his colleagues. Mickey Rooney, one of Beery's few co-stars to consistently speak highly of him in subsequent decades, related in his autobiography that Howard Strickling, MGM's head of publicity, once went to Louis B. Mayer to complain that Beery was stealing props off of the studio's sets. "And that wasn't all," Rooney continued. "He went on for some minutes about the trouble that Beery was always causing him ... Mayer sighed and said, 'Yes, Howard, Beery's a son of a bitch. But he's "our" son of a bitch.' Strickling got the point. A family has to be tolerant of its black sheep, particularly if they brought a lot of money into the family fold, which Beery certainly did."
Child actors, in particular, recalled unpleasant encounters with Beery. Jackie Cooper, who made several films with him early in his career, called him "a big disappointment", and accused him of upstaging, and other attempts to undermine his performances, out of what Cooper presumed was jealousy. He recalled impulsively throwing his arms around Beery after one especially heartfelt scene, only to be gruffly pushed away.
Child actress Margaret O'Brien claimed that she had to be protected by crew members from Beery's insistence on constantly pinching her.

Rooney remained an exception to the general negative attitude among child actors. In his memoir he described Beery as "... a lovable, shambling kind of guy who never seemed to know that his shirttail belonged inside his pants, but always knew when a little kid actor needed a smile and a wink or a word of encouragement." He did concede that "not everyone loved [Beery] as much as I did." Beery, by contrast, described Rooney as a "brat", but a "fine actor".

Beery owned and flew his own planes, one a Howard DGA-11. On April 15, 1933 he was commissioned a Lieutenant Commander in the United States Navy Reserve at NRAB Long Beach. One of his proudest achievements was catching the largest black sea bass in the world off Santa Catalina Island in 1916, a record that stood for 35 years.

A noteworthy episode in Beery's life is chronicled in the fifth episode of Ken Burns' documentary "": In 1943, President Franklin D. Roosevelt signed an executive order creating Jackson Hole National Monument to protect the land adjoining the Grand Tetons in Wyoming. Local ranchers, outraged at the loss of grazing lands, compared FDR's action to Hitler's taking of Austria. Led by an aging Beery, they protested by herding 500 cattle across the monument lands without a permit.

Wallace Beery died at his Beverly Hills, California home of a heart attack on April 15, 1949. He collapsed while reading his newspaper and magazines. He was interred at Forest Lawn Memorial Park in Glendale, California. The inscription on his grave reads, "No man is indispensable but some are irreplaceable." When Mickey Rooney's father died less than a year later, Rooney arranged to have him buried next to his old friend. "I thought it was fitting that these two comedians should rest in peace, side by side," he wrote.

For his contributions to the film industry, Wallace Beery posthumously received a motion pictures star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame in 1960. His star is located at 7001 Hollywood Boulevard.

Beery is mentioned in the film "Barton Fink", in which the lead character has been hired to write a wrestling screenplay to star Beery.






</doc>
<doc id="142784" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=142784" title="Warner Baxter">
Warner Baxter

Warner Leroy Baxter (March 29, 1889 – May 7, 1951) was an American film actor from the 1910s to the 1940s. Baxter became known for his role as The Cisco Kid in the 1928 film "In Old Arizona" for which he won the Academy Award for Best Actor at the 2nd Academy Awards. He frequently played womanizing, charismatic Latin bandit types in westerns, and played The Cisco Kid or a similar character throughout the 1930s, but had a range of other roles throughout his career.

Baxter began his movie career in silent films with his most notable roles being in "The Great Gatsby" (1926) and "The Awful Truth" (1925). Baxter's most notable talkies are "In Old Arizona" (1929), "42nd Street" (1932), "Slave Ship" (1937), "Kidnapped" (1938), and the 1931 ensemble short film, "The Stolen Jools". In the 1940s, he was well known for his recurring role as Dr. Robert Ordway in the "Crime Doctor" series of ten films.

For his contributions to the motion picture industry, Baxter has a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame.

Baxter was born in Columbus, Ohio to Edwin F. Baxter (1867–1889) and Jane Barrett (1869–1962). Baxter was 5 months old when his father died.

Baxter and his mother went to live with her brother in Columbus, Ohio. They later moved to New York City where he became active in dramatics, both participating in school productions and attending plays. In 1898, the two moved to San Francisco where he graduated from Polytechnic High School. When the 1906 San Francisco earthquake struck, Baxter and his mother lived in Golden Gate Park for eight days and then went to live with friends in Alameda for three months. In 1908, they returned to Columbus. After selling farm implements for a living, Baxter worked for four months as the partner of Dorothy Shoemaker in an act on the Keith Vaudeville Circuit.

Baxter began his film career as an extra in 1914 in a stock company. He had his first starring role in "Sheltered Daughters" (1921), and starred in 48 features during the 1920s. His most notable silent roles were in "The Great Gatsby" (1926), "Aloma of the South Seas" (1926) as an island love interest opposite dancer Gilda Gray, and an alcoholic doctor in "West of Zanzibar" (1928) with Lon Chaney.

Baxter's most notable starring role was as the Cisco Kid in "In Old Arizona" (1929), the first all-talking western, for which he won the second Academy Award for Best Actor. He also starred in "42nd Street" (1933), "Grand Canary" (1934), "Broadway Bill" (1934) and "Kidnapped" (1938).

By 1936, Baxter was the highest paid actor in Hollywood, but by 1943 he had slipped to B movie roles, and he starred in a series of "Crime Doctor" films for Columbia Pictures. Baxter had roles in more than 100 films between 1914 and 1950.

Baxter married Viola Caldwell in 1911, but they were soon separated and then divorced in 1913. He married actress Winifred Bryson in 1918, remaining married until his death in 1951. 

He was a close friend of William Powell with whom he had starred in three films, and was at Powell's side when Jean Harlow died in 1937.

When not acting, Baxter was an inventor who co-created a searchlight for revolvers in 1935 which allowed a shooter to more clearly see a target at night. He also developed a radio device that would allow emergency crews to change traffic signals from two blocks away, providing them with safe passage through intersections. He financed the device's installation at a Beverly Hills intersection in 1940.

Baxter suffered from arthritis for several years, and in 1951 he underwent a lobotomy to ease the pain. On May 7, 1951, he died of pneumonia at age 62 and was interred in Forest Lawn Memorial Park Cemetery in Glendale, California. He was survived by his second wife and his mother.

In 1960, Baxter posthumously received a motion pictures star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame at 6284 Hollywood Boulevard.




</doc>
<doc id="147352" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=147352" title="William Holden">
William Holden

William Holden (born William Franklin Beedle Jr.; April 17, 1918 – November 12, 1981) was an American actor who was one of the biggest box-office draws of the 1950s and 1960s. He won the Academy Award for Best Actor in 1953 for his role in "Stalag 17", and a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actor for his role in the 1973 television film "The Blue Knight".

Holden starred in some of Hollywood's most popular and critically acclaimed films, including such classics as "Sunset Boulevard", "Sabrina", "The Bridge on the River Kwai", "The Wild Bunch", "Picnic", and "Network". He was named one of the "Top 10 Stars of the Year" six times (1954–1958, 1961), and appeared as 25th on the American Film Institute's list of 25 greatest male stars of Classic Hollywood Cinema.
Holden was born William Franklin Beedle Jr. on April 17, 1918, in O'Fallon, Illinois, son of William Franklin Beedle (1891–1967), an industrial chemist, and his wife Mary Blanche Ball (1898–1990), a schoolteacher. He had two younger brothers, Robert Westfield Beedle (1921–January 1, 1944) and Richard P. Beedle (1924–1964). One of his father's grandmothers, Rebecca Westfield, was born in England in 1817, while some of his mother's ancestors settled in Virginia's Lancaster County after emigrating from England in the 17th century. His younger brother, Robert W. "Bobbie" Beedle, became a U.S. Navy fighter pilot and was killed in action in World War II, over New Ireland, a Japanese-occupied island in the South Pacific, on January 5, 1944.

His family moved to South Pasadena when he was three. After graduating from South Pasadena High School, Holden attended Pasadena Junior College, where he became involved in local radio plays. A version of how he obtained his stage name "Holden" is based on a statement by George Ross of "Billboard": "William Holden, the lad just signed for the coveted lead in "Golden Boy", used to be Bill Beadle. And here is how he obtained his new movie tag. On the Columbia lot is an assistant director and scout named Harold Winston. Not long ago he was divorced from the actress, Gloria Holden, but carried the torch after the marital rift. Winston was one of those who discovered the "Golden Boy" newcomer and who renamed him—in honor of his former spouse!"

Holden's first starring role was in "Golden Boy" (1939), costarring Barbara Stanwyck, in which he played a violinist-turned-boxer. He was still an unknown actor at the time, while Stanwyck was already a film star. She liked Holden and went out of her way to help him succeed, devoting her personal time to coaching and encouraging him, which made them into lifelong friends. When she received her Honorary Oscar at the 1982 Academy Award ceremony, Holden had died in an accident just a few months prior. At the end of her acceptance speech, she paid him a personal tribute: "I loved him very much, and I miss him. He always wished that I would get an Oscar. And so tonight, my golden boy, you got your wish".

Next he starred with George Raft and Humphrey Bogart in the Warner Bros. gangster epic "Invisible Stripes" later the same year, followed by the role of George Gibbs in the film adaptation of "Our Town". After Columbia Pictures picked up half of his contract, he alternated between starring in several minor pictures for Paramount and Columbia before serving as a second lieutenant in the United States Army Air Corps during World War II, where he acted in training films for the First Motion Picture Unit. His career took off in 1950 when Billy Wilder tapped him to star in "Sunset Boulevard", in which he played a down-at-heel screenwriter taken in by a faded silent-screen star, played by Gloria Swanson. Holden earned his first Best Actor Oscar nomination with the part.

Getting the part was a lucky break for Holden, as the role was initially cast with Montgomery Clift, who backed out of his contract. Swanson later said, "Bill Holden was a man I could have fallen in love with. He was perfection on- and off-screen." And Wilder himself commented, "Bill was a complex guy, a totally honorable friend. He was a genuine star. Every woman was in love with him."

Following this breakthrough film, his career quickly grew as Holden played a series of roles that combined his good looks with cynical detachment, including a prisoner-of-war entrepreneur in "Stalag 17" (1953), for which he won the Academy Award for Best Actor, a pressured young engineer/family man in "Executive Suite" (1954), an acerbic stage director in "The Country Girl" (1954) with Bing Crosby and Grace Kelly, a conflicted jet pilot in the Korean War film "The Bridges at Toko-Ri" (1954), a wandering college football star in "Picnic" (1955), a dashing war correspondent in "Love Is a Many-Splendored Thing" (1955), his most widely recognized role as an ill-fated prisoner in "The Bridge on the River Kwai" (1957) with Alec Guinness, a World War II tug boat captain in "The Key" (1958), and an American Civil War military surgeon in John Ford's "The Horse Soldiers" (1959) opposite John Wayne. He played a number of sunnier roles in light comedy, such as the handsome architect pursuing virginal Maggie McNamara in the controversial Production Code-breaking "The Moon Is Blue" (1953), as Judy Holliday's tutor in "Born Yesterday" (1950), and as a playwright captivated by Ginger Rogers' character in "Forever Female" (1953).
He co-starred as Humphrey Bogart's younger brother, a carefree playboy, in "Sabrina" (1954), played by Audrey Hepburn. It was Holden's third film with director Billy Wilder. Holden and Hepburn became romantically involved during the filming, unbeknown to Wilder: "People on the set told me later that Bill and Audrey were having an affair, and everybody knew. Well, not everybody! I didn't know." The interactions between Bogart, Hepburn, and Holden made shooting less than pleasant, as Bogart had wanted his wife, Lauren Bacall, to play Sabrina. Bogart was not especially friendly toward Hepburn, who had little Hollywood experience, whilst Holden's reaction was the opposite, wrote biographer Michelangelo Capua.

Holden recalls their romance: Their relationship did not last much beyond the completion of the film. Holden, who was at this point dependent on alcohol, said, "I really was in love with Audrey, but she wouldn't marry me." Rumors at the time had it that Hepburn wanted a family, but when Holden told her that he'd had a vasectomy and having children was impossible, she moved on. A few months later, Hepburn met Mel Ferrer, whom she would later marry.

In 1954, Holden was featured on the cover of "Life". On February 7, 1955, Holden appeared as a guest star on "I Love Lucy" as himself. His career peaked in 1957 with the enormous success of "The Bridge on the River Kwai", but Holden spent the next several years starring in a number of films that rarely succeeded commercially or critically. By the mid-1960s, the quality of his roles and films had noticeably diminished. A heavy drinker most of his life, Holden descended into alcoholism in the 1960s and 1970s.

In 1969, Holden made a comeback when he starred in director Sam Peckinpah's graphically violent Western "The Wild Bunch", winning much acclaim. Also in 1969, Holden starred in director Terence Young's family film "L'Arbre de Noël", co-starring Italian actress Virna Lisi and French actor Bourvil, based on the novel of the same name by Michel Bataille. This film was originally released in the United States as "The Christmas Tree" and on home video as "When Wolves Cry."

For television roles in 1974, Holden won a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Miniseries or a Movie for his portrayal of a cynical, tough veteran LAPD street cop in the television film "The Blue Knight", based upon the best-selling Joseph Wambaugh novel of the same name.

In 1973, Holden starred with Kay Lenz in movie directed by Clint Eastwood called "Breezy", which was considered a box-office flop. Also in 1974, Holden starred with Paul Newman and Steve McQueen in the critically acclaimed disaster film "The Towering Inferno", which became a box-office smash and one of the highest-grossing films of Holden's career. Two years later, he was praised for his Oscar-nominated leading performance in Sidney Lumet's classic "Network" (1976), an examination of the media written by Paddy Chayefsky, playing an older version of the character type for which he had become iconic in the 1950s, only now more jaded and aware of his own mortality. In 1980, Holden appeared in "The Earthling" with popular child actor Ricky Schroder, playing a loner dying of cancer who goes to the Australian outback to end his days, meets a young boy whose parents have been killed in an accident, and teaches him how to survive.

During his last years, he appeared in his second Irwin Allen film, "When Time Ran Out", a critical and commercial failure and heavily disliked by Holden himself. Blake Edwards' "S.O.B.", was more successful. In 1981, Holden was offered the role of Coach Daniel B. Delaney in "That Championship Season". He became very depressed when filming was delayed, and drank even more heavily.

Holden was best man at the wedding of his friend Ronald Reagan to Nancy Davis in 1952; however, he never involved himself in politics.

While in Italy in 1966, Holden killed another driver in a drunk-driving incident. He received an eight-month suspended sentence for vehicular manslaughter.

Holden maintained a home in Switzerland and also spent much of his time working for wildlife conservation as a managing partner in an animal preserve in Africa. His Mount Kenya Safari Club in Nanyuki (founded 1959) became a mecca for the international jet set. On a trip to Africa, he fell in love with the wildlife and became increasingly concerned with the animal species that were beginning to decrease in population. With the help of his partners, he created the Mount Kenya Game Ranch and inspired the creation of the William Holden Wildlife Foundation. The Mount Kenya Game Ranch works to assist in Kenya with the wildlife education of its youth. Within the Mount Kenya Game Ranch, is the Mount Kenya Conservancy which runs an animal orphanage as well as the Bongo Rehabilitation Program in collaboration with the Kenya Wildlife Service. The orphanage provides shelter and care for orphans, injured and neglected animals found in the wild, with the aim of releasing these animals back into the wild whenever possible. The conservancy is home to the critically endangered East African mountain bongo, and aims to prevent its extinction by breeding.

Holden was married to actress Ardis Ankerson (stage name Brenda Marshall) from 1941 until their divorce 30 years later, in 1971. They had two sons, Peter Westfield "West" Holden and Scott Porter Holden. He adopted his wife's daughter, Virginia, from her first marriage with actor Richard Gaines. During the filming of the film "Sabrina" (1954), costar Audrey Hepburn and he had a brief but passionate affair. Holden met French actress Capucine in the early 1960s. The two starred in the films "The Lion" (1962) and "The 7th Dawn" (1964). They reportedly began a two-year affair, which is alleged to have ended due to Holden's alcoholism. Capucine and Holden remained friends until his death in 1981.

In 1972, Holden began a nine-year relationship with actress Stefanie Powers, and sparked her interest in animal welfare. After his death, Powers set up the William Holden Wildlife Foundation at Holden's Mount Kenya Game Ranch.

According to the Los Angeles County Coroner's autopsy report, Holden was alone and intoxicated in his apartment in Santa Monica, California, on November 12, 1981, when he slipped on a rug, severely lacerating his forehead on a teak bedside table, and bled to death. Evidence suggests he was conscious for at least half an hour after the fall. He likely may not have realized the severity of the injury and did not summon aid, or was unable to call for help. His body was found four days later. The causes of death were given as "exsanguination" and "blunt laceration of scalp". Rumors existed that he was suffering from lung cancer, which Holden himself had denied at a 1980 press conference. His death certificate made no mention of any cancer. He had dictated in his will that the Neptune Society cremate him and scatter his ashes in the Pacific Ocean. In accordance with his wishes, no funeral or memorial service was held.

When Holden died, President Ronald Reagan released a statement, saying, "I have a great feeling of grief. We were close friends for many years. What do you say about a longtime friend - a sense of personal loss, a fine man. Our friendship never waned." 

For his contribution to the film industry, Holden has a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame located at 1651 Vine Street. He also has a star on the St. Louis Walk of Fame. His death was noted by singer-songwriter Suzanne Vega, whose 1987 song "Tom's Diner" (about a sequence of events one morning in 1981) included a mention of reading a newspaper article about "an actor who had died while he was drinking". Vega subsequently confirmed that this was a reference to Holden.

For a number of years exhibitors voted Holden among the most popular stars in the country:

Notes
Bibliography



</doc>
<doc id="7605117" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7605117" title="George Arliss">
George Arliss

George Arliss (10 April 1868 – 5 February 1946) was an English actor, author, playwright and filmmaker who found success in the United States. He was the first British actor to win an Academy Award, as well as being the earliest-born actor to win one.

Born in London and baptised as Augustus George Andrews but commonly listed as George Augustus Andrews, his relatives referred to him as Uncle Gus. Arliss was educated at Harrow. He started work in the publishing office of his father (William Joseph Arliss Andrews) but left at age eighteen to go on the stage. He began his acting career on the stage in the British provinces in 1887. By 1900, he was playing London's West End in supporting roles. He embarked for a tour of America in 1901 in Mrs Patrick Campbell's troupe. Intending to remain in the US only for the length of the tour, Arliss stayed for twenty years, eventually becoming a star in 1908 in "The Devil". Producer George Tyler commissioned Louis Napoleon Parker in 1911 to write a play specifically tailored for Arliss, and the actor toured in "Disraeli" for five years, eventually becoming closely identified with the 19th century British prime minister.

He began his film career with "The Devil" (1921), followed by "Disraeli" and four other silent films. Today, only "The Devil", "Disraeli", "$20 a Week", and "The Green Goddess" (1923), based on the hit stage play in which he had starred, are known to have survived. He remade "Disraeli" (1929) in sound (and won the Academy Award for Best Actor), converting successfully at the age of 61 from a star of the legitimate theatre, and then silent films, to the talkies.

Arliss made ten sound films exclusively for Warner Bros. under a contract that gave the star an unusual amount of creative control for the time. Curiously, his casting of actors and rewriting of scripts were privileges granted him by the studio that are not even mentioned in his contract. One of these films, "The Man Who Played God" (1932), was Bette Davis's first leading role. Until the end of Davis's life, she would credit Arliss for personally insisting upon her as his leading lady and giving her a chance to show her mettle. The two also co-starred in "The Working Man" in 1933.

Arliss built a production unit at Warners' both in front of and behind the cameras. His stage manager, Maude Howell, became an assistant producer and was one of the few female film executives in Hollywood at that time. After his first three films, Arliss approved an undistinguished director, John Adolfi, to direct each of his films from that point on. Adolfi soon found himself regarded as a successful director of the critically and financially acclaimed Arliss films. Arliss preferred to use the same reliable actors, such as Ivan Simpson (who was also a sculptor) and Charles Evans, from film to film. Yet Arliss had an eye for discovering unknown newcomers, such as James Cagney, Randolph Scott and Dick Powell, among others. Despite his extensive involvement in the planning and production of his films, Arliss claimed credit only for acting. 

Working closely with Warners' production chief, Darryl F. Zanuck, Arliss left the studio when Zanuck resigned in April 1933. Zanuck quickly signed Arliss to make new films at Zanuck's fledgling studio, 20th Century Pictures, prompting Warners' to bitterly complain to the Motion Picture Academy of Arts and Sciences that Zanuck had "stolen" their star. Arliss is remembered primarily for his witty series of historical biographies such as "Alexander Hamilton", "Voltaire", "The House of Rothschild", "The Iron Duke", and "Cardinal Richelieu".

However, he had a second string to his bow, a series of domestic comedies such as "The Millionaire", "A Successful Calamity", "The Working Man", and "The Last Gentleman", among others. 

He often appeared with his wife, Florence Arliss (née Florence Kate Montgomery Smith) (1871–1950), to whom he was married from 16 September 1899 until his death. They had no children, although Leslie Arliss, who became a prolific producer-director for Gainsborough Pictures, is erroneously referred to as their son in some reference works. Florence (or "Flo", as George called her) starred both on stage and in films (both silent and sound) with her husband and almost always played his character's spouse. However, that did not prevent Arliss from using another actress when Flo was not right for a role. Also, Flo turned down roles that George wanted her to play in some films.

In 1934 British filmgoers named Arliss their favourite male star.

Arliss was approaching 70 when he completed the British-made "Doctor Syn" in 1937. He and Flo returned to America later that year to visit old friends, including famed astronomer Edwin Hubble in California. Producer-director Cecil B. DeMille arranged for the Arlisses to re-enact their roles in "Disraeli" on DeMille's popular radio show, Lux Radio Theatre, in January 1938. The occasion was heralded as "a new page in radio history". George and Flo subsequently appeared on Lux in radio adaptations of "The Man Who Played God" in March 1938, and in "Cardinal Richelieu" in January 1939, which was apparently their final dramatic appearance anywhere. Returning to their home in London in April 1939, the onset of the Second World War prevented their return to America during Arliss's remaining years. The only taint of scandal involved charges by the British Government in September 1941 that Arliss had not complied with a recent requirement to report bank accounts he maintained in the US and Canada. (Similar charges were also brought against actor-playwright Noël Coward around the same time) Both men claimed ignorance of the new law, but were fined and publicly humiliated by the experience.

Arliss settled at Pangbourne in Berkshire. Film producer Darryl F. Zanuck tried to interest Arliss in returning to Hollywood to star in "The Pied Piper" in 1942. Braving the Luftwaffe's Blitz on London throughout the war, Arliss remained in his native city. He died in Maida Hill, London, of a bronchial ailment on 5 February 1946, aged 77. His gravestone does not refer to his success in the performing arts, but recites the one achievement of which he was apparently most proud: an honorary Master of Arts degree he received from Columbia University in 1919.

Arliss was a prominent anti-vivisectionist who founded the National Anti-Vivisection Society of Chicago. He was president of the Episcopal Actors' Guild of America from 1921 to 1938.

Arliss has a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame at 6648 Hollywood Boulevard. He is also a member of the American Theater Hall of Fame. His grave is located in London's All Saints' Churchyard, Harrow Weald.





</doc>
<doc id="61641" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61641" title="Charles Laughton">
Charles Laughton

Charles Laughton (1 July 1899 – 15 December 1962) was an English stage and film actor, director, producer and screenwriter. Laughton was trained in London at the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art and first appeared professionally on the stage in 1926. In 1927, he was cast in a play with his future wife Elsa Lanchester, with whom he lived and worked until his death; they had no children.

He played a wide range of classical and modern parts, making an impact in Shakespeare at the Old Vic. His film career took him to Broadway and then Hollywood, but he also collaborated with Alexander Korda on notable British films of the era, including "The Private Life of Henry VIII". He portrayed everything from monsters and misfits to kings. Among Laughton's biggest film hits were "The Barretts of Wimpole Street", "Mutiny on the Bounty", "Ruggles of Red Gap", "Jamaica Inn", "The Hunchback of Notre Dame", and "The Big Clock". In his later career, he took up stage directing, notably in "The Caine Mutiny Court-Martial", and George Bernard Shaw's "Don Juan in Hell", in which he also starred. He directed one film, the thriller "The Night of the Hunter".

Laughton has been seen by one actor as one of the greatest performers of his generation. Daniel Day-Lewis cited him as one of his inspirations, saying: "He was probably the greatest film actor who came from that period of time. He had something quite remarkable. His generosity as an actor, he fed himself into that work. As an actor, you cannot take your eyes off him."

Laughton was born in Scarborough, North Riding of Yorkshire, the son of Eliza (née Conlon; 1869–1953) and Robert Laughton (1869–1924), Yorkshire hotel keepers. A blue plaque marks his birthplace. His mother was a devout Roman Catholic of Irish ancestry, and she sent him to briefly attend a local boys' school, Scarborough College, before sending him to Stonyhurst College, the pre-eminent English Jesuit school. Laughton served in World War I, during which he was gassed, serving first with the 2/1st Battalion of the Huntingdonshire Cyclist Battalion, and then with the 7th Battalion of the Northamptonshire Regiment.

He started work in the family hotel, though also participating in amateur theatricals in Scarborough. Allowed by his family to become a drama student at RADA in 1925, where actor Claude Rains was one of his teachers. Laughton made his first professional appearance on 28 April 1926 at the Barnes Theatre, as Osip in the comedy "The Government Inspector", which he also appeared in at London's Gaiety Theatre in May. He impressed audiences with his talent and had classical roles in two Chekov plays, "The Cherry Orchard" and "The Three Sisters". Laughton played the lead role as Harry Hegan in the world premiere of Seán O'Casey's "The Silver Tassie" in 1928 in London. He played the title roles in Arnold Bennett's "Mr Prohack" (Elsa Lanchester was also in the cast) and as Samuel Pickwick in "Mr Pickwick" at the Theatre Royal (1928–29) in London.

He played Tony Perelli in Edgar Wallace's "On the Spot" and William Marble in "Payment Deferred". He took the last role across the Atlantic and made his United States debut on 24 September 1931, at the Lyceum Theatre. He returned to London for the 1933–34 Old Vic season and was engaged in four Shakespeare roles (as Macbeth and Henry VIII, Angelo in "Measure for Measure" and Prospero in "The Tempest") and also as Lopakhin in "The Cherry Orchard", Canon Chasuble in "The Importance of Being Earnest", and Tattle in "Love for Love". In 1936, he went to Paris and on 9 May appeared at the Comédie-Française as Sganarelle in the second act of Molière's "Le Médecin malgré lui", the first English actor to appear at that theatre, where he acted the part in French and received an ovation. 

Laughton commenced his film career in Britain while still acting on the London stage. He also took small roles in three short silent comedies starring his wife Elsa Lanchester, "Daydreams", "Blue Bottles" and "The Tonic" (all 1928) which had been specially written for her by H.G. Wells and were directed by Ivor Montagu. He made a brief appearance as a disgruntled diner in another silent film "Piccadilly" with Anna May Wong in 1929. He appeared with Lanchester again in a "film revue", featuring assorted British variety acts, called "Comets" (1930) in which they sang a duet, "The Ballad of Frankie and Johnnie". He made two other early British talkies: "Wolves" with Dorothy Gish (1930) from a play set in a whaling camp in the frozen north, and "Down River" (1931), in which he played a drug-smuggling ship's captain.

His New York stage debut in 1931 immediately led to film offers and Laughton's first Hollywood film was "The Old Dark House" (1932) with Boris Karloff, in which he played a bluff Yorkshire businessman marooned during a storm with other travelers in a creepy remote Welsh manor. He then played a demented submarine commander in "Devil and the Deep" with Tallulah Bankhead, Gary Cooper and Cary Grant, and followed this with his best-remembered film role of that year as Nero in Cecil B. DeMille's "The Sign of the Cross". Laughton turned out other memorable performances during that first Hollywood trip, repeating his stage role as a murderer in "Payment Deferred", playing H.G. Wells' mad vivisectionist Dr. Moreau in "Island of Lost Souls", and the meek raspberry-blowing clerk in the brief segment of "If I Had A Million", directed by Ernst Lubitsch. He appeared in six Hollywood films in 1932. His association with director Alexander Korda began in 1933 with the hugely successful "The Private Life of Henry VIII" (loosely based on the life of King Henry VIII), for which Laughton won an Academy Award. He also continued to act occasionally on stage, including a US production of "The Life of Galileo" by (and with) Bertolt Brecht. 

Laughton soon gave up the stage for films and returned to Hollywood, where his next film was "White Woman" (1933) in which he co-starred with Carole Lombard as a Cockney river trader in the Malayan jungle. Then came "The Barretts of Wimpole Street" (1934) as Norma Shearer's character's malevolent father (although Laughton was only three years older than Shearer); "Les Misérables" (1935) as Inspector Javert; one of his most famous screen roles in "Mutiny on the Bounty" (1935) as Captain William Bligh, co-starring with Clark Gable as Fletcher Christian; and "Ruggles of Red Gap" (1935) as the very English butler transported to early 1900s America. He signed to play Micawber in "David Copperfield" (1934), but after a few days shooting asked to be released from the part and was replaced by W. C. Fields. 

Back in the UK, and again with Korda, he played the title role in "Rembrandt" (1936). In 1937, also for Korda, he starred in an ill-fated film version of the classic novel, "I, Claudius", by Robert Graves, which was abandoned during filming owing to the injuries suffered by co-star Merle Oberon in a car crash. After "I, Claudius", he and the expatriate German film producer Erich Pommer founded the production company Mayflower Pictures in the UK, which produced three films starring Laughton: "Vessel of Wrath" (US title "The Beachcomber") (1938), based on a story by W. Somerset Maugham, in which his wife, Elsa Lanchester, co-starred; "St. Martin's Lane" (US title "Sidewalks of London"), about London street entertainers, which featured Vivien Leigh and Rex Harrison; and "Jamaica Inn", with Maureen O'Hara and Robert Newton, about Cornish shipwreckers, based on Daphne du Maurier's novel, and the last film Alfred Hitchcock directed in Britain before moving to Hollywood in the late 1930s.

The films produced were not commercially successful enough, and the company was saved from bankruptcy only when RKO Pictures offered Laughton the title role (Quasimodo) in "The Hunchback of Notre Dame" (1939), with "Jamaica Inn" co-star O'Hara. Laughton and Pommer had plans to make further films, but the outbreak of World War II, which implied the loss of many foreign markets, meant the end of the company. Laughton's early success in "The Private Life of Henry VIII" established him as one of the leading interpreters of the costume and historical drama parts for which he is best remembered (Nero, Henry VIII, Mr. Barrett, Inspector Javert, Captain Bligh, Rembrandt, Quasimodo and others); he was also type-cast for arrogant, unscrupulous characters. 

He largely moved away from historical parts when he played an Italian vineyard owner in California in "They Knew What They Wanted" (1940); a South Seas patriarch in "The Tuttles of Tahiti" (1942); and an American admiral during World War II in "Stand By for Action" (1942). He played a Victorian butler in "Forever and a Day" (1943) and an Australian bar-owner in "The Man from Down Under" (1943). Simon Callow's 1987 biography quotes a number of contemporary reviews of Laughton's performances in these films. James Agate, reviewing "Forever and a Day", wrote: "Is there no-one at RKO to tell Charles Laughton when he is being plain bad?" On the other hand, Bosley Crowther of the "New York Times" declared that "Forever and a Day" boasted "superb performances".

C. A. Lejeune, wrote Callow, was "shocked" by the poor quality of Laughton's work of that period: "One of the most painful screen phenomena of latter years", she wrote in "The Observer", "has been the decline and fall of Charles Laughton." On the other hand, David Shipman, in his book "The Great Movie Stars: The Golden Years", said "Laughton was a total actor. His range was wide".

Laughton played a cowardly schoolmaster in occupied France in "This Land is Mine" (1943), by Jean Renoir, in which he engaged himself most actively; in fact, while Renoir was still working on an early script, Laughton would talk about Alphonse Daudet's story "The Last Lesson", which suggested to Renoir a relevant scene for the film. Laughton played a henpecked husband who eventually murders his wife in "The Suspect" (1944), directed by Robert Siodmak, who would become a good friend. He played sympathetically an impoverished composer-pianist in "Tales of Manhattan" (1942) and starred in an updated version of Oscar Wilde's "The Canterville Ghost" in 1944.

Laughton appeared in two comedies with Deanna Durbin, "It Started with Eve" (1941) and "Because of Him" (1946). He portrayed a bloodthirsty pirate in "Captain Kidd" (1945) and a malevolent judge in "The Paradine Case" (1948). Laughton played a megalomaniac press tycoon in "The Big Clock" (1948). He had supporting roles as a Nazi in pre-war Paris in "Arch of Triumph" (1948), as a bishop in "The Girl from Manhattan" (1948), as a seedy go-between in "The Bribe" (1949), and as a kindly widower in "The Blue Veil" (1951). He played a Bible-reading pastor in the multi-story "A Miracle Can Happen" (1947), but his piece wound up being cut and replaced with another featuring Dorothy Lamour, and in this form the film was retitled as "On Our Merry Way". However, an original print of "A Miracle Can Happen" was sent abroad for dubbing before the Laughton sequence was deleted, and in this form it was shown in Spain as "Una Encuesta Llamada Milagro".

Laughton made his first colour film in Paris as Inspector Maigret in "The Man on the Eiffel Tower" (1949) and, wrote the "Monthly Film Bulletin", "appeared to overact" alongside Boris Karloff as a mad French nobleman in a version of Robert Louis Stevenson's "The Strange Door" in 1951. He played a tramp in "O. Henry's Full House" (1952). He became the pirate Captain Kidd again, this time for comic effect, in "Abbott and Costello Meet Captain Kidd" (1952). Laughton made a guest appearance on the "Colgate Comedy Hour" (featuring Abbott and Costello), in which he delivered the Gettysburg Address. In 1953 he played Herod Antipas in "Salome", and he reprised his role as Henry VIII in "Young Bess", a 1953 drama about Henry's children.

He returned to Britain to star in "Hobson's Choice" (1954), directed by David Lean. Laughton received Academy Award and Golden Globe nominations for his role in "Witness for the Prosecution" (1957). He played a British admiral in "Under Ten Flags" (1960) and worked with Laurence Olivier in "Spartacus" (1960). His final film was "Advise & Consent" (1962), for which he received favourable comments for his performance as a Southern US Senator (for which accent he studied recordings of Mississippi Senator John C. Stennis).

In 1955, Laughton directed "The Night of the Hunter", starring Robert Mitchum, Shelley Winters and Lillian Gish, and produced by his friend Paul Gregory. The film has been cited among critics as one of the best of the 1950s, and has been selected by the United States National Film Registry for preservation in the Library of Congress. At the time of its original release, however, it was a critical and box-office failure, and Laughton never directed again. The documentary "Charles Laughton Directs The Night of the Hunter" by Robert Gitt (2002) features preserved rushes and outtakes with Laughton's audible off-camera direction.

Laughton made his London stage debut in Gogol's "The Government Inspector" (1926). He appeared in many West End plays in the following few years and his earliest successes on the stage were as Hercule Poirot in "Alibi" (1928); he was the first actor to portray the Belgian detective in this stage adaptation of "The Murder of Roger Ackroyd", and as William Marble in "Payment Deferred", making his Lyceum Theatre (New York) debut in 1931. 

In 1926, he played the role of the criminal Ficsur in the original London production of Ferenc Molnár's "Liliom" (The play became a musical in 1945 by Rodgers and Hammerstein as "Carousel", where Ficsur became Jigger Craigin, but Laughton never appeared in the musical version). While Laughton is most remembered for his film career, he continued to work in the theatre, as when, after the success of "The Private Life of Henry VIII" he appeared at the Old Vic Theatre in 1933 as Macbeth, Lopakin in "The Cherry Orchard", Prospero in "The Tempest" and Angelo in "Measure for Measure". In the US, Laughton worked with Bertolt Brecht on a new English version of Brecht's play "Galileo". Laughton played the title role at the play's premiere in Los Angeles on 30 July 1947 and later that year in New York. This staging was directed by Joseph Losey. The processes by which Laughton painstakingly, over many weeks, created his Galileo—and incidentally, edited and translated the play along with Brecht—are detailed in an essay by Brecht, "Building Up A Part: Laughton's Galileo."

Laughton had one of his most notable successes in the theatre by directing and playing the Devil in "Don Juan in Hell" beginning in 1950. The piece is actually the third act sequence from George Bernard Shaw's play "Man and Superman", frequently cut from productions to reduce its playing time, consisting of a philosophical debate between Don Juan and the Devil with contributions from Doña Ana and the statue of Ana's father. Laughton conceived the piece as a staged reading and cast Charles Boyer, Cedric Hardwicke and Agnes Moorehead (billed as "The First Drama Quartette") in the other roles. Boyer won a special Tony Award for his performance. 

He directed several plays on Broadway, mostly under the production of his friend and Broadway producer Paul Gregory. His most notable box-office success as a director came in 1954, with "The Caine Mutiny Court-Martial", a full-length stage dramatisation by Herman Wouk of the court-martial scene in Wouk's novel "The Caine Mutiny". The play, starring Henry Fonda as defence attorney Barney Greenwald, opened the same year as the film starring Humphrey Bogart as Captain Queeg and José Ferrer as Greenwald based on the original novel, but did not affect that film's box-office performance. Laughton also directed a staged reading in 1953 of Stephen Vincent Benét's "John Brown's Body", a full-length poem about the American Civil War and its aftermath. The production starred Tyrone Power, Raymond Massey (re-creating his film characterisations of Abraham Lincoln and John Brown), and Judith Anderson. Laughton did not appear himself in either production, but "John Brown's Body" was recorded complete by Columbia Masterworks. 

Laughton returned to the London stage in May 1958 to direct and star in Jane Arden's "The Party" at the New Theatre which also had Elsa Lanchester and Albert Finney in the cast. He made his final appearances on stage as Nick Bottom in "A Midsummer Night's Dream", and as King Lear at the Shakespeare Memorial Theatre in 1959, although failing health resulted in both performances being disappointing, according to some British critics. His performance as King Lear was lambasted by critics, including Kenneth Tynan, who wrote that Laughton's Nick Bottom "... behaves in a manner that has nothing to do with acting, although it perfectly hits off the demeanor of a rapscallion uncle dressed up to entertain the children at a Christmas party". Although he did not appear in any later plays, Laughton toured the US with staged readings, including a successful appearance on the Stanford University campus in 1960. 

Laughton's voice, equally capable of a penetrating, theatre-filling shout and a soft, velvety tone, first appeared on 78-rpm records with the release of five British Regal Zonophone 10-inch discs entitled "Voice of the Stars" issued annually from 1934 to 1938. These featured short soundtrack snippets from the year's top films. He is heard on all five records in, respectively, "The Private Life of Henry VIII", "The Barretts of Wimpole Street", "Mutiny on the Bounty", "I, Claudius" (curiously, since this film was unfinished and thus never released), and "Vessel of Wrath". In 1937 he recorded Lincoln's Gettysburg Address on a 10-inch Columbia 78, having made a strong impression with it in "Ruggles of Red Gap".

He made several other spoken-word recordings, one of his most famous being his one-man album of Charles Dickens's "Mr. Pickwick's Christmas", a twenty-minute version of the Christmas chapter from Dickens's "The Pickwick Papers". It was first released by American Decca in 1944 as a four-record 78-rpm set, but was afterward transferred to LP. It frequently appeared on LP with a companion piece, Decca's 1941 adaptation of Dickens's "A Christmas Carol", starring Ronald Colman as Scrooge. Both stories were released together on a Deutsche Grammophon CD for Christmas 2005.

In 1943, Laughton recorded a reading of the Nativity story from St. Luke's Gospel, and this was released in 1995 on CD on a Nimbus Records collection entitled "Prima Voce: The Spirit of Christmas Past". A Brunswick/American Decca LP entitled "Readings from the Bible" featured Laughton reading Garden of Eden, The Fiery Furnace, Noah's Ark, and David and Goliath. It was released in 1958. Laughton had previously included several Bible readings when he played the title role in the film "Rembrandt". Laughton also narrated the story on the soundtrack album of the film that he directed, "Night of the Hunter", accompanied by the film's score. This album has also been released on CD. Also, and derived from the film they made together, a complete radio show (18 June 1945) of "The Canterville Ghost" was broadcast which featured Laughton and Margaret O'Brien. It has been issued on a Pelican LP. 

A two-LP Capitol Records album was released in 1962, the year of Laughton's death, entitled "The Story Teller: A Session with Charles Laughton". Taken from Laughton's one-man stage shows, it culls together dramatic readings from several sources. Three of the excerpts are broadcast annually on a Minnesota Public Radio Thanksgiving program entitled "Giving Thanks". "The Story Teller" won a Grammy in 1962 for Best Spoken Word Recording. However, although the album has yet to be released on compact disc, it can now be heard in its entirety online.

Laughton was the fill-in host on 9 September 1956, when Elvis Presley made his first of three appearances on CBS's "The Ed Sullivan Show", which garnered 72 million viewers (Ed Sullivan was recuperating from a car accident). That same year, Laughton hosted the first of two programmes devoted to classical music entitled "Festival of Music", and telecast on the NBC television anthology series "Producers' Showcase". One of his last performances was on "Checkmate", in which he played a missionary recently returned from China. He threw himself into the role, travelling to China for several months to better understand his character.

In 1927, Laughton began a relationship with Elsa Lanchester, at the time a castmate in a stage play. The two were married in 1929, became US citizens in 1950, and remained together until Laughton's death. Over the years, they appeared together in several films, including "Rembrandt" (1936), "Tales of Manhattan" (1942) and "The Big Clock" (1948). Lanchester portrayed Anne of Cleves, Henry VIII's fourth wife, opposite Laughton in "The Private Life of Henry VIII". They both received Academy Award nominations for their performances in "Witness for the Prosecution" (1957)—Laughton for Best Actor, and Lanchester for Best Supporting Actress—but neither won.

Although Laughton's bisexuality has been corroborated by several of his contemporaries and is generally accepted by Hollywood historians, actress Maureen O'Hara, a friend and co-star of Laughton, has disputed the contention that his sexuality was the reason Laughton and Lanchester did not have children. O'Hara claimed Laughton told her that he had wanted children but that it had not been possible because of a botched abortion that Lanchester had early in her career of performing burlesque. In her autobiography, Lanchester acknowledged two abortions in her youth—one of the pregnancies purportedly by Laughton—although she didn't mention whether she had been rendered infertile. According to her biographer, Charles Higham, the reason she did not have children was that she did not want any.

Laughton owned a spectacular estate on the bluffs above Pacific Coast Highway at 14954 Corona Del Mar in Pacific Palisades. The property suffered a landslide in 1944, alluded to by Bertolt Brecht in his poem "Garden in Progress".

Charles Laughton died on 15 December 1962 from spinal cancer and is buried at Forest Lawn Memorial Park (Hollywood Hills)

Laughton won the New York Film Critics' Circle Awards for "Mutiny on the Bounty" and "Ruggles of Red Gap" in 1935.


For his contributions to the motion picture industry, Laughton has a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame at 7021 Hollywood Boulevard.





</doc>
<doc id="43675" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43675" title="Laurence Olivier">
Laurence Olivier

Laurence Kerr Olivier, Baron Olivier, (; 22 May 1907 – 11 July 1989) was an English actor and director who, along with his contemporaries Ralph Richardson and John Gielgud, dominated the British stage of the mid-20th century. He also worked in films throughout his career, playing more than fifty cinema roles. Late in his career, he had considerable success in television roles.

His family had no theatrical connections, but Olivier's father, a clergyman, decided that his son should become an actor. After attending a drama school in London, Olivier learned his craft in a succession of acting jobs during the late 1920s. In 1930 he had his first important West End success in Noël Coward's "Private Lives", and he appeared in his first film. In 1935 he played in a celebrated production of "Romeo and Juliet" alongside Gielgud and Peggy Ashcroft, and by the end of the decade he was an established star. In the 1940s, together with Richardson and John Burrell, Olivier was the co-director of the Old Vic, building it into a highly respected company. There his most celebrated roles included Shakespeare's Richard III and Sophocles's Oedipus. In the 1950s Olivier was an independent actor-manager, but his stage career was in the doldrums until he joined the "avant garde" English Stage Company in 1957 to play the title role in "The Entertainer", a part he later played on film. From 1963 to 1973 he was the founding director of Britain's National Theatre, running a resident company that fostered many future stars. His own parts there included the title role in "Othello" (1964) and Shylock in "The Merchant of Venice" (1970).

Among Olivier's films are "Wuthering Heights" (1939), "Rebecca" (1940), and a trilogy of Shakespeare films as actor-director: "Henry V" (1944), "Hamlet" (1948), and "Richard III" (1955). His later films included "The Shoes of the Fisherman" (1968), "Sleuth" (1972), "Marathon Man" (1976), and "The Boys from Brazil" (1978). His television appearances included an adaptation of "The Moon and Sixpence" (1960), "Long Day's Journey into Night" (1973), "Love Among the Ruins" (1975), "Cat on a Hot Tin Roof" (1976), "Brideshead Revisited" (1981) and "King Lear" (1983).

Olivier's honours included a knighthood (1947), a life peerage (1970) and the Order of Merit (1981). For his on-screen work he received four Academy Awards, two British Academy Film Awards, five Emmy Awards and three Golden Globe Awards. The National Theatre's largest auditorium is named in his honour, and he is commemorated in the Laurence Olivier Awards, given annually by the Society of London Theatre. He was married three times, to the actresses Jill Esmond from 1930 to 1940, Vivien Leigh from 1940 to 1960, and Joan Plowright from 1961 until his death.

Olivier was born in Dorking, Surrey, the youngest of the three children of the Revd Gerard Kerr Olivier (1869–1939) and his wife Agnes Louise, "née" Crookenden (1871–1920). Their elder children were Sybille (1901–1989) and Gerard Dacres "Dickie" (1904–1958). His great-great-grandfather was of French Huguenot descent, and Olivier came from a long line of Protestant clergymen. Gerard Olivier had begun a career as a schoolmaster, but in his thirties he discovered a strong religious vocation and was ordained as a priest of the Church of England. He practised extremely high church, ritualist Anglicanism and liked to be addressed as "Father Olivier". This made him unacceptable to most Anglican congregations, and the only church posts he was offered were temporary, usually deputising for regular incumbents in their absence. This meant a nomadic existence, and for Laurence's first few years, he never lived in one place long enough to make friends.

In 1912, when Olivier was five, his father secured a permanent appointment as assistant priest at St Saviour's, Pimlico. He held the post for six years, and a stable family life was at last possible. Olivier was devoted to his mother, but not to his father, whom he found a cold and remote parent. Nevertheless, he learned a great deal of the art of performing from him. As a young man Gerard Olivier had considered a stage career and was a dramatic and effective preacher. Olivier wrote that his father knew "when to drop the voice, when to bellow about the perils of hellfire, when to slip in a gag, when suddenly to wax sentimental ... The quick changes of mood and manner absorbed me, and I have never forgotten them."
In 1916, after attending a series of preparatory schools, Olivier passed the singing examination for admission to the choir school of All Saints, Margaret Street, in central London. His elder brother was already a pupil, and Olivier gradually settled in, though he felt himself to be something of an outsider. The church's style of worship was (and remains) Anglo-Catholic, with emphasis on ritual, vestments and incense. The theatricality of the services appealed to Olivier, and the vicar encouraged the students to develop a taste for secular as well as religious drama. In a school production of "Julius Caesar" in 1917, the ten-year-old Olivier's performance as Brutus impressed an audience that included Lady Tree, the young Sybil Thorndike, and Ellen Terry, who wrote in her diary, "The small boy who played Brutus is already a great actor." He later won praise in other schoolboy productions, as Maria in "Twelfth Night" (1918) and Katherine in "The Taming of the Shrew" (1922).

From All Saints, Olivier went on to St Edward's School, Oxford, from 1920 to 1924. He made little mark until his final year, when he played Puck in the school's production of "A Midsummer Night's Dream"; his performance was a tour de force that won him popularity among his fellow pupils. In January 1924, his brother left England to work in India as a rubber planter. Olivier missed him greatly and asked his father how soon he could follow. He recalled in his memoirs that his father replied, "Don't be such a fool, you're not going to India, you're going on the stage."

In 1924 Gerard Olivier, a habitually frugal man, told his son that not only must he gain admission to the Central School of Speech Training and Dramatic Art, but he must also gain a scholarship with a bursary to cover his tuition fees and living expenses. Olivier's sister had been a student there and was a favourite of Elsie Fogerty, the founder and principal of the school. Olivier later speculated that it was on the strength of this that Fogerty agreed to award him the bursary.
One of Olivier's contemporaries at the school was Peggy Ashcroft, who observed he was "rather uncouth in that his sleeves were too short and his hair stood on end but he was intensely lively and great fun". By his own admission, he was not a very conscientious student, but Fogerty liked him and later said that he and Ashcroft stood out among her many pupils. On leaving the school after a year, Olivier gained work with small touring companies before being taken on in 1925 by Sybil Thorndike and her husband, Lewis Casson, as a bit-part player, understudy and assistant stage manager for their London company. He modelled his performing style on that of Gerald du Maurier, of whom he said, "He seemed to mutter on stage but had such perfect technique. When I started I was so busy doing a du Maurier that no one ever heard a word I said. The Shakespearean actors one saw were terrible hams like Frank Benson." His concern to speak naturally and avoid what he called "singing" Shakespeare's verse was the cause of much frustration in his early career, with critics regularly decrying his delivery.

In 1926, on Thorndike's recommendation, Olivier joined the Birmingham Repertory Company. His biographer Michael Billington describes the Birmingham company as "Olivier's university", where in his second year he was given the chance to play a wide range of important roles, including Tony Lumpkin in "She Stoops to Conquer", the title role in "Uncle Vanya", and Parolles in "All's Well That Ends Well". Billington adds that the engagement led to "a lifelong friendship with his fellow actor Ralph Richardson that was to have a decisive effect on the British theatre."

While playing the juvenile lead in "Bird in Hand" at the Royalty Theatre in June 1928, Olivier began a relationship with Jill Esmond, the daughter of the actors Henry V. Esmond and Eva Moore. Olivier later recounted that he thought "she would most certainly do excellent well for a wife ... I wasn't likely to do any better at my age and with my undistinguished track-record, so I promptly fell in love with her."

In 1928 Olivier created the role of Stanhope in R. C. Sherriff's "Journey's End", in which he scored a great success at its single Sunday night premiere. He was offered the part in the West End production the following year, but turned it down in favour of the more glamorous role of Beau Geste in a stage adaptation of P. C. Wren's 1929 novel of the same name. "Journey's End" became a long-running success; "Beau Geste" failed. "The Manchester Guardian" commented, "Mr. Laurence Olivier did his best as Beau, but he deserves and will get better parts. Mr. Olivier is going to make a big name for himself". For the rest of 1929 Olivier appeared in seven plays, all of which were short-lived. Billington ascribes this failure rate to poor choices by Olivier rather than mere bad luck.

In 1930, with his impending marriage in mind, Olivier earned some extra money with small roles in two films. In April he travelled to Berlin to film the English-language version of "The Temporary Widow", a crime comedy with Lilian Harvey, and in May he spent four nights working on another comedy, "Too Many Crooks". During work on the latter film, for which he was paid £60, he met Laurence Evans, who became his personal manager. Olivier did not enjoy working in film, which he dismissed as "this anaemic little medium which could not stand great acting", but financially it was much more rewarding than his theatre work.

Olivier and Esmond married on 25 July 1930 at All Saints, Margaret Street, although within weeks both realised they had erred. Olivier later recorded that the marriage was "a pretty crass mistake. I insisted on getting married from a pathetic mixture of religious and animal promptings. ... She had admitted to me that she was in love elsewhere and could never love me as completely as I would wish". Olivier later recounted that following the wedding he did not keep a diary for ten years and never followed religious practices again, although he considered those facts to be "mere coincidence", unconnected to the nuptials.

In 1930 Noël Coward cast Olivier as Victor Prynne in his new play "Private Lives", which opened at the new Phoenix Theatre in London in September. Coward and Gertrude Lawrence played the lead roles, Elyot Chase and Amanda Prynne. Victor is a secondary character, along with Sybil Chase; the author called them "extra puppets, lightly wooden ninepins, only to be repeatedly knocked down and stood up again". To make them credible spouses for Amanda and Elyot, Coward was determined that two outstandingly attractive performers should play the parts. Olivier played Victor in the West End and then on Broadway; Adrianne Allen was Sybil in London, but could not go to New York, where the part was taken by Esmond. In addition to giving the 23-year-old Olivier his first successful West End role, Coward became something of a mentor. In the late 1960s Olivier told Sheridan Morley:

In 1931 RKO Pictures offered Olivier a two-film contract at $1,000 a week; he discussed the possibility with Coward, who, irked, told Olivier "You've no artistic integrity, that's your trouble; this is how you cheapen yourself." He accepted and moved to Hollywood, despite some misgivings. His first film was the drama "Friends and Lovers", in a supporting role, before RKO loaned him to Fox Studios for his first film lead, a British journalist in a Russia under martial law in "The Yellow Passport", alongside Elissa Landi and Lionel Barrymore. The cultural historian Jeffrey Richards describes Olivier's look as an attempt by Fox Studios to produce a likeness of Ronald Colman, and Colman's moustache, voice and manner are "perfectly reproduced". Olivier returned to RKO to complete his contract with the 1932 drama "Westward Passage", which was a commercial failure. Olivier's initial foray into American films had not provided the breakthrough he hoped for; disillusioned with Hollywood, he returned to London, where he appeared in two British films, "Perfect Understanding" with Gloria Swanson and "No Funny Business"—in which Esmond also appeared. He was tempted back to Hollywood in 1933 to appear opposite Greta Garbo in "Queen Christina", but was replaced after two weeks of filming because of a lack of chemistry between the two.

Olivier's stage roles in 1934 included Bothwell in Gordon Daviot's "Queen of Scots", which was only a moderate success for him and for the play, but led to an important engagement for the same management (Bronson Albery) shortly afterwards. In the interim he had a great success playing a thinly disguised version of the American actor John Barrymore in Edna Ferber's "Theatre Royal". His success was vitiated by his breaking an ankle two months into the run, in one of the athletic, acrobatic stunts with which he liked to enliven his performances.
In 1935, under Albery's management, John Gielgud staged "Romeo and Juliet" at the New Theatre, co-starring with Peggy Ashcroft, Edith Evans and Olivier. Gielgud had seen Olivier in "Queen of Scots", spotted his potential, and now gave him a major step up in his career. For the first weeks of the run Gielgud played Mercutio and Olivier played Romeo, after which they exchanged roles. The production broke all box-office records for the play, running for 189 performances. Olivier was enraged at the notices after the first night, which praised the virility of his performance but fiercely criticised his speaking of Shakespeare's verse, contrasting it with his co-star's mastery of the poetry. The friendship between the two men was prickly, on Olivier's side, for the rest of his life.

In May 1936 Olivier and Richardson jointly directed and starred in a new piece by J. B. Priestley, "Bees on the Boatdeck". Both actors won excellent notices, but the play, an allegory of Britain's decay, did not attract the public and closed after four weeks. Later in the same year Olivier accepted an invitation to join the Old Vic company. The theatre, in an unfashionable location south of the Thames, had offered inexpensive tickets for opera and drama under its proprietor Lilian Baylis since 1912. Her drama company specialised in the plays of Shakespeare, and many leading actors had taken very large cuts in their pay to develop their Shakespearean techniques there. Gielgud had been in the company from 1929 to 1931, and Richardson from 1930 to 1932. Among the actors whom Olivier joined in late 1936 were Edith Evans, Ruth Gordon, Alec Guinness and Michael Redgrave. In January 1937 he took the title role in an uncut version of "Hamlet", in which once again his delivery of the verse was unfavourably compared with that of Gielgud, who had played the role on the same stage seven years previously to enormous acclaim. "The Observer"'s Ivor Brown praised Olivier's "magnetism and muscularity" but missed "the kind of pathos so richly established by Mr Gielgud". The reviewer in "The Times" found the performance "full of vitality", but at times "too light ... the character slips from Mr Olivier's grasp".
After "Hamlet", the company presented "Twelfth Night" in what the director, Tyrone Guthrie, summed up as "a baddish, immature production of mine, with Olivier outrageously amusing as Sir Toby and a very young Alec Guinness outrageous and more amusing as Sir Andrew". "Henry V" was the next play, presented in May to mark the Coronation of George VI. A pacifist, as he then was, Olivier was as reluctant to play the warrior king as Guthrie was to direct the piece, but the production was a success, and Baylis had to extend the run from four to eight weeks.

Following Olivier's success in Shakespearean stage productions, he made his first foray into Shakespeare on film in 1936, as Orlando in "As You Like It", directed by Paul Czinner, "a charming if lightweight production", according to Michael Brooke of the British Film Institute's (BFI's) Screenonline. The following year Olivier appeared alongside Vivien Leigh in the historical drama "Fire Over England". He had first met Leigh briefly at the Savoy Grill and then again when she visited him during the run of "Romeo and Juliet", probably early in 1936, and the two had begun an affair sometime that year. Of the relationship, Olivier later said that "I couldn't help myself with Vivien. No man could. I hated myself for cheating on Jill, but then I had cheated before, but this was something different. This wasn't just out of lust. This was love that I really didn't ask for but was drawn into." While his relationship with Leigh continued he conducted an affair with the actress Ann Todd, and possibly had a brief affair with the actor Henry Ainley, according to the biographer Michael Munn.

In June 1937 the Old Vic company took up an invitation to perform "Hamlet" in the courtyard of the castle at Elsinore, where Shakespeare located the play. Olivier secured the casting of Leigh to replace Cherry Cottrell as Ophelia. Because of torrential rain the performance had to be moved from the castle courtyard to the ballroom of a local hotel, but the tradition of playing Hamlet at Elsinore was established, and Olivier was followed by, among others, Gielgud (1939), Redgrave (1950), Richard Burton (1954), Derek Jacobi (1979), Kenneth Branagh (1988) and Jude Law (2009). Back in London, the company staged "Macbeth", with Olivier in the title role. The stylised production by Michel Saint-Denis was not well liked, but Olivier had some good notices among the bad. On returning from Denmark, Olivier and Leigh told their respective spouses about the affair and that their marriages were over; Esmond moved out of the marital house and in with her mother. After Olivier and Leigh made a tour of Europe in mid 1937 they returned to separate film projects—"A Yank at Oxford" for her and "The Divorce of Lady X" for him—and moved into a property together in Iver, Buckinghamshire.

Olivier returned to the Old Vic for a second season in 1938. For "Othello" he played Iago, with Richardson in the title role. Guthrie wanted to experiment with the theory that Iago's villainy is driven by suppressed homosexual love for Othello. Olivier was willing to co-operate, but Richardson was not; audiences and most critics failed to spot the supposed motivation of Olivier's Iago, and Richardson's Othello seemed underpowered. After that comparative failure, the company had a success with "Coriolanus" starring Olivier in the title role. The notices were laudatory, mentioning him alongside great predecessors such as Edmund Kean, William Macready and Henry Irving. The actor Robert Speaight described it as "Olivier's first incontestably great performance". This was Olivier's last appearance on a London stage for six years.

In 1938 Olivier joined Richardson to film the spy thriller "Q Planes", released the following year. Frank Nugent, the critic for "The New York Times", thought Olivier was "not quite so good" as Richardson, but was "quite acceptable". In late 1938, lured by a salary of $50,000, the actor travelled to Hollywood to take the part of Heathcliff in the 1939 film "Wuthering Heights", alongside Merle Oberon and David Niven. In less than a month Leigh had joined him, explaining that her trip was "partially because Larry's there and partially because I intend to get the part of Scarlett O'Hara"—the role in "Gone with the Wind" in which she was eventually cast. Olivier did not enjoy making "Wuthering Heights", and his approach to film acting, combined with a dislike for Oberon, led to tensions on set. The director, William Wyler, was a hard taskmaster, and Olivier learned to remove what Billington described as "the carapace of theatricality" to which he was prone, replacing it with "a palpable reality". The resulting film was a commercial and critical success that earned him a nomination for the Academy Award for Best Actor, and created his screen reputation. Caroline Lejeune, writing for "The Observer", considered that "Olivier's dark, moody face, abrupt style, and a certain fine arrogance towards the world in his playing are just right" in the role, while the reviewer for "The Times" wrote that Olivier "is a good embodiment of Heathcliff ... impressive enough on a more human plane, speaking his lines with real distinction, and always both romantic and alive."
After returning to London briefly in mid-1939, the couple returned to America, Leigh to film the final takes for "Gone with the Wind", and Olivier to prepare for filming of Alfred Hitchcock's "Rebecca"—although the couple had hoped to appear in it together. Instead, Joan Fontaine was selected for the role of Mrs de Winter, as the producer David O. Selznick thought that not only was she more suitable for the role, but that it was best to keep Olivier and Leigh apart until their divorces came through. Olivier followed "Rebecca" with "Pride and Prejudice", in the role of Mr. Darcy. To his disappointment Elizabeth Bennet was played by Greer Garson rather than Leigh. He received good reviews for both films and showed a more confident screen presence than he had in his early work. In January 1940 Olivier and Esmond were granted their divorce. In February, following another request from Leigh, her husband also applied for their marriage to be terminated.

On stage, Olivier and Leigh starred in "Romeo and Juliet" on Broadway. It was an extravagant production, but a commercial failure. In "The New York Times" Brooks Atkinson praised the scenery but not the acting: "Although Miss Leigh and Mr Olivier are handsome young people they hardly act their parts at all." The couple had invested almost all their savings in the project, and its failure was a grave financial blow. They were married in August 1940, at the San Ysidro Ranch in Santa Barbara.

The war in Europe had been under way for a year and was going badly for Britain. After his wedding Olivier wanted to help the war effort. He telephoned Duff Cooper, the Minister of Information under Winston Churchill, hoping to get a position in Cooper's department. Cooper advised him to remain where he was and speak to the film director Alexander Korda, who was based in the US at Churchill's behest, with connections to British Intelligence. Korda—with Churchill's support and involvement—directed "That Hamilton Woman", with Olivier as Horatio Nelson and Leigh in the title role. Korda saw that the relationship between the couple was strained. Olivier was tiring of Leigh's suffocating adulation, and she was drinking to excess. The film, in which the threat of Napoleon paralleled that of Hitler, was seen by critics as "bad history but good British propaganda", according to the BFI.

Olivier's life was under threat from the Nazis and pro-German sympathisers. The studio owners were concerned enough that Samuel Goldwyn and Cecil B. DeMille both provided support and security to ensure his safety. On the completion of filming, Olivier and Leigh returned to Britain. He had spent the previous year learning to fly and had completed nearly 250 hours by the time he left America. He intended to join the Royal Air Force but instead made another propaganda film, "49th Parallel", narrated short pieces for the Ministry of Information, and joined the Fleet Air Arm because Richardson was already in the service. Richardson had gained a reputation for crashing aircraft, which Olivier rapidly eclipsed. Olivier and Leigh settled in a cottage just outside RAF Worthy Down, where he was stationed with a training squadron; Noël Coward visited the couple and thought Olivier looked unhappy. Olivier spent much of his time taking part in broadcasts and making speeches to build morale, and in 1942 he was invited to make another propaganda film, "The Demi-Paradise", in which he played a Soviet engineer who helps improve British-Russian relationships.
In 1943, at the behest of the Ministry of Information, Olivier began working on "Henry V". Originally he had no intention of taking the directorial duties, but ended up directing and producing, in addition to taking the title role. He was assisted by an Italian internee, Filippo Del Giudice, who had been released to produce propaganda for the Allied cause. The decision was made to film the battle scenes in neutral Ireland, where it was easier to find the 650 extras. John Betjeman, the press attaché at the British embassy in Dublin, played a key liaison role with the Irish government in making suitable arrangements. The film was released in November 1944. Brooke, writing for the BFI, considers that it "came too late in the Second World War to be a call to arms as such, but formed a powerful reminder of what Britain was defending." The music for the film was written by William Walton, "a score that ranks with the best in film music", according to the music critic Michael Kennedy. Walton also provided the music for Olivier's next two Shakespearean adaptations, "Hamlet" (1948) and "Richard III" (1955). "Henry V" was warmly received by critics. The reviewer for "The Manchester Guardian" wrote that the film combined "new art hand-in-hand with old genius, and both superbly of one mind", in a film that worked "triumphantly". The critic for "The Times" considered that Olivier "plays Henry on a high, heroic note and never is there danger of a crack", in a film described as "a triumph of film craft". There were Oscar nominations for the film, including Best Picture and Best Actor, but it won none and Olivier was instead presented with a "Special Award". He was unimpressed, and later commented that "this was my first absolute fob-off, and I regarded it as such."

Throughout the war Tyrone Guthrie had striven to keep the Old Vic company going, even after German bombing in 1942 left the theatre a near-ruin. A small troupe toured the provinces, with Sybil Thorndike at its head. By 1944, with the tide of the war turning, Guthrie felt it time to re-establish the company in a London base and invited Richardson to head it. Richardson made it a condition of accepting that he should share the acting and management in a triumvirate. Initially he proposed Gielgud and Olivier as his colleagues, but the former declined, saying, "It would be a disaster, you would have to spend your whole time as referee between Larry and me." It was finally agreed that the third member would be the stage director John Burrell. The Old Vic governors approached the Royal Navy to secure the release of Richardson and Olivier; the Sea Lords consented, with, as Olivier put it, "a speediness and lack of reluctance which was positively hurtful."
The triumvirate secured the New Theatre for their first season and recruited a company. Thorndike was joined by, among others, Harcourt Williams, Joyce Redman and Margaret Leighton. It was agreed to open with a repertory of four plays: "Peer Gynt", "Arms and the Man", "Richard III" and "Uncle Vanya". Olivier's roles were the Button Moulder, Sergius, Richard and Astrov; Richardson played Peer, Bluntschli, Richmond and Vanya. The first three productions met with acclaim from reviewers and audiences; "Uncle Vanya" had a mixed reception, although "The Times" thought Olivier's Astrov "a most distinguished portrait" and Richardson's Vanya "the perfect compound of absurdity and pathos". In "Richard III", according to Billington, Olivier's triumph was absolute: "so much so that it became his most frequently imitated performance and one whose supremacy went unchallenged until Antony Sher played the role forty years later". In 1945 the company toured Germany, where they were seen by many thousands of Allied servicemen; they also appeared at the Comédie-Française theatre in Paris, the first foreign company to be given that honour. The critic Harold Hobson wrote that Richardson and Olivier quickly "made the Old Vic the most famous theatre in the Anglo-Saxon world."

The second season, in 1945, featured two double bills. The first consisted of "Henry IV, Parts 1 and 2". Olivier played the warrior Hotspur in the first and the doddering Justice Shallow in the second. He received good notices, but by general consent the production belonged to Richardson as Falstaff. In the second double bill it was Olivier who dominated, in the title roles of "Oedipus Rex" and "The Critic". In the two one-act plays his switch from searing tragedy and horror in the first half to farcical comedy in the second impressed most critics and audience members, though a minority felt that the transformation from Sophocles's bloodily blinded hero to Sheridan's vain and ludicrous Mr Puff "smacked of a quick-change turn in a music hall". After the London season the company played both the double bills and "Uncle Vanya" in a six-week run on Broadway.

The third, and final, London season under the triumvirate was in 1946–47. Olivier played King Lear, and Richardson took the title role in "Cyrano de Bergerac". Olivier would have preferred the roles to be reversed, but Richardson did not wish to attempt Lear. Olivier's Lear received good but not outstanding reviews. In his scenes of decline and madness towards the end of the play some critics found him less moving than his finest predecessors in the role. The influential critic James Agate suggested that Olivier used his dazzling stage technique to disguise a lack of feeling, a charge that the actor strongly rejected, but which was often made throughout his later career. During the run of "Cyrano", Richardson was knighted, to Olivier's undisguised envy. The younger man received the accolade six months later, by which time the days of the triumvirate were numbered. The high profile of the two star actors did not endear them to the new chairman of the Old Vic governors, Lord Esher. He had ambitions to be the first head of the National Theatre and had no intention of letting actors run it. He was encouraged by Guthrie, who, having instigated the appointment of Richardson and Olivier, had come to resent their knighthoods and international fame.

In January 1947 Olivier began working on his second film as a director, "Hamlet" (1948), in which he also took the lead role. The original play was heavily cut to focus on the relationships, rather than the political intrigue. The film became a critical and commercial success in Britain and abroad, although Lejeune, in "The Observer", considered it "less effective than [Olivier's] stage work. ... He speaks the lines nobly, and with the caress of one who loves them, but he nullifies his own thesis by never, for a moment, leaving the impression of a man who cannot make up his own mind; here, you feel rather, is an actor-producer-director who, in every circumstance, knows exactly what he wants, and gets it". , the critic for "The Daily Telegraph" thought the film "brilliant ... one of the masterpieces of the stage has been made into one of the greatest of films." "Hamlet" became the first non-American film to win the Academy Award for Best Picture, while Olivier won the Award for Best Actor.

In 1948 Olivier led the Old Vic company on a six-month tour of Australia and New Zealand. He played Richard III, Sir Peter Teazle in Sheridan's" The School for Scandal" and Antrobus in Thornton Wilder's "The Skin of Our Teeth", appearing alongside Leigh in the latter two plays. While Olivier was on the Australian tour and Richardson was in Hollywood, Esher terminated the contracts of the three directors, who were said to have "resigned". Melvyn Bragg in a 1984 study of Olivier, and John Miller in the authorised biography of Richardson, both comment that Esher's action put back the establishment of a National Theatre for at least a decade. Looking back in 1971, Bernard Levin wrote that the Old Vic company of 1944 to 1948 "was probably the most illustrious that has ever been assembled in this country". "The Times" said that the triumvirate's years were the greatest in the Old Vic's history; as "The Guardian" put it, "the governors summarily sacked them in the interests of a more mediocre company spirit".

By the end of the Australian tour, both Leigh and Olivier were exhausted and ill, and he told a journalist, "You may not know it, but you are talking to a couple of walking corpses." Later he would comment that he "lost Vivien" in Australia, a reference to Leigh's affair with the Australian actor Peter Finch, whom the couple met during the tour. Shortly afterwards Finch moved to London, where Olivier auditioned him and put him under a long-term contract with Laurence Olivier Productions. Finch and Leigh's affair continued on and off for several years.

Although it was common knowledge that the Old Vic triumvirate had been dismissed, they refused to be drawn on the matter in public, and Olivier even arranged to play a final London season with the company in 1949, as Richard III, Sir Peter Teazle, and Chorus in his own production of Anouilh's "Antigone" with Leigh in the title role. After that, he was free to embark on a new career as an actor-manager. In partnership with Binkie Beaumont he staged the English premiere of Tennessee Williams's "A Streetcar Named Desire", with Leigh in the central role of Blanche DuBois. The play was condemned by most critics, but the production was a considerable commercial success, and led to Leigh's casting as Blanche in the 1951 film version. Gielgud, who was a devoted friend of Leigh's, doubted whether Olivier was wise to let her play the demanding role of the mentally unstable heroine: "[Blanche] was so very like her, in a way. It must have been a most dreadful strain to do it night after night. She would be shaking and white and quite distraught at the end of it."
The production company set up by Olivier took a lease on the St James's Theatre. In January 1950 he produced, directed and starred in Christopher Fry's verse play "Venus Observed". The production was popular, despite poor reviews, but the expensive production did little to help the finances of Laurence Olivier Productions. After a series of box-office failures, the company balanced its books in 1951 with productions of Shaw's "Caesar and Cleopatra" and Shakespeare's "Antony and Cleopatra" which the Oliviers played in London and then took to Broadway. Olivier was thought by some critics to be under par in both his roles, and some suspected him of playing deliberately below his usual strength so that Leigh might appear his equal. Olivier dismissed the suggestion, regarding it as an insult to his integrity as an actor. In the view of the critic and biographer W. A. Darlington, he was simply miscast both as Caesar and Antony, finding the former boring and the latter weak. Darlington comments, "Olivier, in his middle forties when he should have been displaying his powers at their very peak, seemed to have lost interest in his own acting". Over the next four years Olivier spent much of his time working as a producer, presenting plays rather than directing or acting in them. His presentations at the St James's included seasons by Ruggero Ruggeri's company giving two Pirandello plays in Italian, followed by a visit from the Comédie-Française playing works by Molière, Racine, Marivaux and Musset in French. Darlington considers a 1951 production of "Othello" starring Orson Welles as the pick of Olivier's productions at the theatre.

While Leigh made "Streetcar" in 1951, Olivier joined her in Hollywood to film "Carrie", based on the controversial novel "Sister Carrie"; although the film was plagued by troubles, Olivier received warm reviews and a BAFTA nomination. Olivier began to notice a change in Leigh's behaviour, and he later recounted that "I would find Vivien sitting on the corner of the bed, wringing her hands and sobbing, in a state of grave distress; I would naturally try desperately to give her some comfort, but for some time she would be inconsolable." After a holiday with Coward in Jamaica, she seemed to have recovered, but Olivier later recorded, "I am sure that ... [the doctors] must have taken some pains to tell me what was wrong with my wife; that her disease was called manic depression and what that meant—a possibly permanent cyclical to-and-fro between the depths of depression and wild, uncontrollable mania. He also recounted the years of problems he had experienced because of Leigh's illness, writing, "throughout her possession by that uncannily evil monster, manic depression, with its deadly ever-tightening spirals, she retained her own individual canniness—an ability to disguise her true mental condition from almost all except me, for whom she could hardly be expected to take the trouble."

In January 1953 Leigh travelled to Ceylon (now Sri Lanka) to film "Elephant Walk" with Peter Finch. Shortly after filming started she suffered a breakdown, and returned to Britain where, between periods of incoherence, she told Olivier that she was in love with Finch, and had been having an affair with him; she gradually recovered over a period of several months. As a result of the breakdown, many of the Oliviers' friends learned of her problems. Niven said she had been "quite, quite mad", and in his diary, Coward expressed the view that "things had been bad and getting worse since 1948 or thereabouts."

For the Coronation season of 1953, Olivier and Leigh starred in the West End in Terence Rattigan's Ruritanian comedy, "The Sleeping Prince". It ran for eight months but was widely regarded as a minor contribution to the season, in which other productions included Gielgud in "Venice Preserv'd", Coward in "The Apple Cart" and Ashcroft and Redgrave in "Antony and Cleopatra".

Olivier directed his third Shakespeare film in September 1954, "Richard III" (1955), which he co-produced with Korda. The presence of four theatrical knights in the one film—Olivier was joined by Cedric Hardwicke, Gielgud and Richardson—led an American reviewer to dub it "An-All-Sir-Cast". The critic for "The Manchester Guardian" described the film as a "bold and successful achievement", but it was not a box-office success, which accounted for Olivier's subsequent failure to raise the funds for a planned film of "Macbeth". He won a BAFTA award for the role and was nominated for the Best Actor Academy Award, which Yul Brynner won.

In 1955 Olivier and Leigh were invited to play leading roles in three plays at the Shakespeare Memorial Theatre, Stratford. They began with "Twelfth Night", directed by Gielgud, with Olivier as Malvolio and Leigh as Viola. Rehearsals were difficult, with Olivier determined to play his conception of the role despite the director's view that it was vulgar. Gielgud later commented:

The next production was "Macbeth". Reviewers were lukewarm about the direction by Glen Byam Shaw and the designs by Roger Furse, but Olivier's performance in the title role attracted superlatives. To J. C. Trewin, Olivier's was "the finest Macbeth of our day"; to Darlington it was "the best Macbeth of our time". Leigh's Lady Macbeth received mixed but generally polite notices, although to the end of his life Olivier believed it to have been the best Lady Macbeth he ever saw.
In their third production of the 1955 Stratford season, Olivier played the title role in "Titus Andronicus", with Leigh as Lavinia. Her notices in the part were damning, but the production by Peter Brook and Olivier's performance as Titus received the greatest ovation in Stratford history from the first-night audience, and the critics hailed the production as a landmark in post-war British theatre. Olivier and Brook revived the production for a continental tour in June 1957; its final performance, which closed the old Stoll Theatre in London, was the last time Leigh and Olivier acted together.

Leigh became pregnant in 1956 and withdrew from the production of Coward's comedy "South Sea Bubble". The day after her final performance in the play she miscarried and entered a period of depression that lasted for months. The same year Olivier decided to direct and produce a film version of "The Sleeping Prince", retitled "The Prince and the Showgirl". Instead of appearing with Leigh, he cast Marilyn Monroe as the showgirl. Although the filming was challenging because of Monroe's behaviour, the film was appreciated by the critics.

During the production of "The Prince and the Showgirl", Olivier, Monroe and her husband, the American playwright Arthur Miller, went to see the English Stage Company's production of John Osborne's "Look Back in Anger" at the Royal Court. Olivier had seen the play earlier in the run and disliked it, but Miller was convinced that Osborne had talent, and Olivier reconsidered. He was ready for a change of direction; in 1981 he wrote:

Osborne was already at work on a new play, "The Entertainer", an allegory of Britain's post-colonial decline, centred on a seedy variety comedian, Archie Rice. Having read the first act—all that was completed by then—Olivier asked to be cast in the part. He had for years maintained that he might easily have been a third-rate comedian called "Larry Oliver", and would sometimes play the character at parties. Behind Archie's brazen façade there is a deep desolation, and Olivier caught both aspects, switching, in the words of the biographer Anthony Holden, "from a gleefully tacky comic routine to moments of the most wrenching pathos". Tony Richardson's production for the English Stage Company transferred from the Royal Court to the Palace Theatre in September 1957; after that it toured and returned to the Palace. The role of Archie's daughter Jean was taken by three actresses during the various runs. The second of them was Joan Plowright, with whom Olivier began a relationship that endured for the rest of his life. Olivier said that playing Archie "made me feel like a modern actor again". In finding an "avant-garde" play that suited him, he was, as Osborne remarked, far ahead of Gielgud and Ralph Richardson, who did not successfully follow his lead for more than a decade. Their first substantial successes in works by any of Osborne's generation were Alan Bennett's "Forty Years On" (Gielgud in 1968) and David Storey's "Home" (Richardson and Gielgud in 1970).

Olivier received another BAFTA nomination for his supporting role in 1959's "The Devil's Disciple". The same year, after a gap of two decades, Olivier returned to the role of Coriolanus, in a Stratford production directed by the 28-year-old Peter Hall. Olivier's performance received strong praise from the critics for its fierce athleticism combined with an emotional vulnerability. In 1960 he made his second appearance for the Royal Court company in Ionesco's absurdist play "Rhinoceros". The production was chiefly remarkable for the star's quarrels with the director, Orson Welles, who according to the biographer Francis Beckett suffered the "appalling treatment" that Olivier had inflicted on Gielgud at Stratford five years earlier. Olivier again ignored his director and undermined his authority. In 1960 and 1961 Olivier appeared in Anouilh's "Becket" on Broadway, first in the title role, with Anthony Quinn as the king, and later exchanging roles with his co-star.
Two films featuring Olivier were released in 1960. The first—filmed in 1959—was "Spartacus", in which he portrayed the Roman general, Marcus Licinius Crassus. His second was "The Entertainer", shot while he was appearing in "Coriolanus"; the film was well received by the critics, but not as warmly as the stage show had been. The reviewer for "The Guardian" thought the performances were good, and wrote that Olivier "on the screen as on the stage, achieves the tour de force of bringing Archie Rice ... to life". For his performance, Olivier was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Actor. He also made an adaptation of "The Moon and Sixpence" in 1960, winning an Emmy Award.

The Oliviers' marriage was disintegrating during the late 1950s. While directing Charlton Heston in the 1960 play "The Tumbler", Olivier divulged that "Vivien is several thousand miles away, trembling on the edge of a cliff, even when she's sitting quietly in her own drawing room", at a time when she was threatening suicide. In May 1960 divorce proceedings started; Leigh reported the fact to the press and informed reporters of Olivier's relationship with Plowright. The decree "nisi" was issued in December 1960, which enabled him to marry Plowright in March 1961. A son, Richard, was born in December 1961; two daughters followed, Tamsin Agnes Margaret—born in January 1963—and Julie-Kate, born in July 1966.

In 1961 Olivier accepted the directorship of a new theatrical venture, the Chichester Festival. For the opening season in 1962 he directed two neglected 17th-century English plays, John Fletcher's 1638 comedy "The Chances" and John Ford's 1633 tragedy "The Broken Heart", followed by "Uncle Vanya". The company he recruited was forty strong and included Thorndike, Casson, Redgrave, Athene Seyler, John Neville and Plowright. The first two plays were politely received; the Chekhov production attracted rapturous notices. "The Times" commented, "It is doubtful if the Moscow Arts Theatre itself could improve on this production." The second Chichester season the following year consisted of a revival of "Uncle Vanya" and two new productions—Shaw's "Saint Joan" and John Arden's "The Workhouse Donkey". In 1963 Olivier received another BAFTA nomination for his leading role as a schoolteacher accused of sexually molesting a student in the film "Term of Trial".

At around the time the Chichester Festival opened, plans for the creation of the National Theatre were coming to fruition. The British government agreed to release funds for a new building on the South Bank of the Thames. Lord Chandos was appointed chairman of the National Theatre Board in 1962, and in August Olivier accepted its invitation to be the company's first director. As his assistants, he recruited the directors John Dexter and William Gaskill, with Kenneth Tynan as literary adviser or "dramaturge". Pending the construction of the new theatre, the company was based at the Old Vic. With the agreement of both organisations, Olivier remained in overall charge of the Chichester Festival during the first three seasons of the National; he used the festivals of 1964 and 1965 to give preliminary runs to plays he hoped to stage at the Old Vic.

The opening production of the National Theatre was "Hamlet" in October 1963, starring Peter O'Toole and directed by Olivier. O'Toole was a guest star, one of occasional exceptions to Olivier's policy of casting productions from a regular company. Among those who made a mark during Olivier's directorship were Michael Gambon, Maggie Smith, Alan Bates, Derek Jacobi and Anthony Hopkins. It was widely remarked that Olivier seemed reluctant to recruit his peers to perform with his company. Evans, Gielgud and Paul Scofield guested only briefly, and Ashcroft and Richardson never appeared at the National during Olivier's time. Robert Stephens, a member of the company, observed, "Olivier's one great fault was a paranoid jealousy of anyone who he thought was a rival".

In his decade in charge of the National, Olivier acted in thirteen plays and directed eight. Several of the roles he played were minor characters, including a crazed butler in Feydeau's "A Flea in Her Ear" and a pompous solicitor in Maugham's "Home and Beauty"; the vulgar soldier Captain Brazen in Farquhar's 1706 comedy "The Recruiting Officer" was a larger role but not the leading one. Apart from his Astrov in the "Uncle Vanya", familiar from Chichester, his first leading role for the National was Othello, directed by Dexter in 1964. The production was a box-office success and was revived regularly over the next five seasons. His performance divided opinion. Most of the reviewers and theatrical colleagues praised it highly; Franco Zeffirelli called it "an anthology of everything that has been discovered about acting in the past three centuries." Dissenting voices included "The Sunday Telegraph", which called it "the kind of bad acting of which only a great actor is capable ... near the frontiers of self-parody"; the director Jonathan Miller thought it "a condescending view of an Afro Caribbean person". The burden of playing this demanding part at the same time as managing the new company and planning for the move to the new theatre took its toll on Olivier. To add to his load, he felt obliged to take over as Solness in "The Master Builder" when the ailing Redgrave withdrew from the role in November 1964. For the first time Olivier began to suffer from stage fright, which plagued him for several years. The National Theatre production of "Othello" was released as a film in 1965, which earned four Academy Award nominations, including another for Best Actor for Olivier.

During the following year Olivier concentrated on management, directing one production ("The Crucible"), taking the comic role of the foppish Tattle in Congreve's "Love for Love", and making one film, "Bunny Lake is Missing", in which he and Coward were on the same bill for the first time since "Private Lives". In 1966, his one play as director was "Juno and the Paycock". "The Times" commented that the production "restores one's faith in the work as a masterpiece". In the same year Olivier portrayed the Mahdi, opposite Heston as General Gordon, in the film "Khartoum".

In 1967 Olivier was caught in the middle of a confrontation between Chandos and Tynan over the latter's proposal to stage Rolf Hochhuth's "Soldiers". As the play speculatively depicted Churchill as complicit in the assassination of the Polish prime minister Władysław Sikorski, Chandos regarded it as indefensible. At his urging the board unanimously vetoed the production. Tynan considered resigning over this interference with the management's artistic freedom, but Olivier himself stayed firmly in place, and Tynan also remained. At about this time Olivier began a long struggle against a succession of illnesses. He was treated for prostate cancer and, during rehearsals for his production of Chekhov's "Three Sisters" he was hospitalised with pneumonia. He recovered enough to take the heavy role of Edgar in Strindberg's "The Dance of Death", the finest of all his performances other than in Shakespeare, in Gielgud's view.

Olivier had intended to step down from the directorship of the National Theatre at the end of his first five-year contract, having, he hoped, led the company into its new building. By 1968 because of bureaucratic delays construction work had not even begun, and he agreed to serve for a second five-year term. His next major role, and his last appearance in a Shakespeare play, was as Shylock in "The Merchant of Venice", his first appearance in the work. He had intended Guinness or Scofield to play Shylock, but stepped in when neither was available. The production by Jonathan Miller, and Olivier's performance, attracted a wide range of responses. Two different critics reviewed it for "The Guardian": one wrote "this is not a role which stretches him, or for which he will be particularly remembered"; the other commented that the performance "ranks as one of his greatest achievements, involving his whole range".

In 1969 Olivier appeared in two war films, portraying military leaders. He played Field Marshal French in the First World War film "Oh! What a Lovely War", for which he won another BAFTA award, followed by Air Chief Marshal Hugh Dowding in "Battle of Britain". In June 1970 he became the first actor to be created a peer for services to the theatre. Although he initially declined the honour, Harold Wilson, the incumbent prime minister, wrote to him, then invited him and Plowright to dinner, and persuaded him to accept.
After this Olivier played three more stage roles: James Tyrone in Eugene O'Neill's "Long Day's Journey into Night" (1971–72), Antonio in Eduardo de Filippo's "Saturday, Sunday, Monday" and John Tagg in Trevor Griffiths's "The Party" (both 1973–74). Among the roles he hoped to play, but could not because of ill-health, was Nathan Detroit in the musical "Guys and Dolls". In 1972 he took leave of absence from the National to star opposite Michael Caine in Joseph L. Mankiewicz's film of Anthony Shaffer's "Sleuth", which "The Illustrated London News" considered to be "Olivier at his twinkling, eye-rolling best"; both he and Caine were nominated for the Academy Award for Best Actor, losing to Marlon Brando in "The Godfather".

The last two stage plays Olivier directed were Jean Giradoux's "Amphitryon" (1971) and Priestley's "Eden End" (1974). By the time of "Eden End", he was no longer director of the National Theatre; Peter Hall took over on 1 November 1973. The succession was tactlessly handled by the board, and Olivier felt that he had been eased out—although he had declared his intention to go—and that he had not been properly consulted about the choice of successor. The largest of the three theatres within the National's new building was named in his honour, but his only appearance on the stage of the Olivier Theatre was at its official opening by the Queen in October 1976, when he made a speech of welcome, which Hall privately described as the most successful part of the evening.

Olivier spent the last 15 years of his life in securing his finances and dealing with deteriorating health, which included thrombosis and dermatomyositis, a degenerative muscle disorder. Professionally, and to provide financial security, he made a series of advertisements for Polaroid cameras in 1972, although he stipulated that they must never be shown in Britain; he also took a number of cameo film roles, which were in "often undistinguished films", according to Billington. Olivier's move from leading parts to supporting and cameo roles came about because his poor health meant he could not get the necessary long insurance for larger parts, with only short engagements in films available.

Olivier's dermatomyositis meant he spent the last three months of 1974 in hospital, and he spent early 1975 slowly recovering and regaining his strength. When strong enough, he was contacted by the director John Schlesinger, who offered him the role of a Nazi torturer in the 1976 film "Marathon Man". Olivier shaved his pate and wore oversized glasses to enlarge the look of his eyes, in a role that the critic David Robinson, writing for "The Times", thought was "strongly played", adding that Olivier was "always at his best in roles that call for him to be seedy or nasty or both". Olivier was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Actor in a Supporting Role, and won the Golden Globe of the same category.

In the mid-1970s Olivier became increasingly involved in television work, a medium of which he was initially dismissive. In 1973 he provided the narration for a 26-episode documentary, "The World at War", which chronicled the events of the Second World War, and won a second Emmy Award for "Long Day's Journey into Night" (1973). In 1975 he won another Emmy for "Love Among the Ruins". The following year he appeared in adaptations of Tennessee Williams's "Cat on a Hot Tin Roof" and Harold Pinter's "The Collection". In 1978 he appeared in the film "The Boys from Brazil", playing the role of Ezra Lieberman, an ageing Nazi hunter; he received his eleventh Academy Award nomination. Although he did not win the Oscar, he was presented with an Honorary Award for his lifetime achievement.

Olivier continued working in film into the 1980s, with roles in "The Jazz Singer" (1980), "Inchon" (1981), "The Bounty" (1984) and "Wild Geese II" (1985). He continued to work in television; in 1981 he appeared as Lord Marchmain in "Brideshead Revisited", winning another Emmy, and the following year he received his tenth and last BAFTA nomination in the television adaptation of John Mortimer's stage play "A Voyage Round My Father". In 1983 he played his last Shakespearean role as Lear in "King Lear", for Granada Television, earning his fifth Emmy. He thought the role of Lear much less demanding than other tragic Shakespearean heroes: "No, Lear is easy. He's like all of us, really: he's just a stupid old fart." When the production was first shown on American television, the critic Steve Vineberg wrote:
The same year he also appeared in a cameo alongside Gielgud and Richardson in "Wagner", with Burton in the title role; his final screen appearance was as an old, wheelchair-bound soldier in Derek Jarman's 1989 film "War Requiem".

After being ill for the last 22 years of his life, Olivier died of renal failure on 11 July 1989 aged 82 at his home near Steyning, West Sussex. His cremation was held three days later, and a funeral was held in Poets' Corner of Westminster Abbey in October that year.

In 1947 Olivier was appointed a Knight Bachelor, and in 1970 he was given a life peerage; the Order of Merit was conferred on him in 1981. He also received honours from foreign governments. In 1949 he was made Commander of the Order of the Dannebrog by the Danish King Frederik IX; the French appointed him ', Legion of Honour, in 1953; the Italian government created him ', Order of Merit of the Italian Republic, in 1953; and in 1971 he was granted the Order of Yugoslav Flag with Golden Wreath.

From academic and other institutions, Olivier received honorary doctorates from the university of Tufts, Massachusetts (1946), Oxford (1957) and Edinburgh (1964). He was also awarded the Danish Sonning Prize in 1966, the Gold Medallion of the Royal Swedish Academy of Letters, History and Antiquities in 1968; and the Albert Medal of the Royal Society of Arts in 1976.

For his work in films, Olivier received four Academy Awards: an honorary award for "Henry V" (1947), a Best Actor award and one as producer for "Hamlet" (1948), and a second honorary award in 1979 to recognise his lifetime of contribution to the art of film. He was nominated for nine other acting Oscars and one each for production and direction. He also won two British Academy Film Awards out of ten nominations, five Emmy Awards out of nine nominations, and three Golden Globe Awards out of six nominations. He was nominated once for a Tony Award (for best actor, as Archie Rice) but did not win.

In February 1960, for his contribution to the film industry, Olivier was inducted into the Hollywood Walk of Fame, with a star at 6319 Hollywood Boulevard; he is included in the American Theater Hall of Fame. In 1977 Olivier was awarded a British Film Institute Fellowship.

In addition to the naming of the National Theatre's largest auditorium in Olivier's honour, he is commemorated in the Laurence Olivier Awards, bestowed annually since 1984 by the Society of West End Theatre. In 1991 Gielgud unveiled a memorial stone commemorating Olivier in Poets' Corner at Westminster Abbey. In 2007, the centenary of Olivier's birth, a life-sized statue of him was unveiled on the South Bank, outside the National Theatre; the same year the BFI held a retrospective season of his film work.

Olivier's acting technique was minutely crafted, and he was known for changing his appearance considerably from role to role. By his own admission, he was addicted to extravagant make-up, and unlike Richardson and Gielgud, he excelled at different voices and accents. His own description of his technique was "working from the outside in"; he said, "I can never act as myself, I have to have a pillow up my jumper, a false nose or a moustache or wig... I cannot come on looking like me and be someone else." Rattigan described how at rehearsals Olivier "built his performance slowly and with immense application from a mass of tiny details". This attention to detail had its critics: Agate remarked, "When I look at a watch it is to see the time and not to admire the mechanism. I want an actor to tell me Lear's time of day and Olivier doesn't. He bids me watch the wheels go round."
Tynan remarked to Olivier, "you aren't really a contemplative or philosophical actor"; Olivier was known for the strenuous physicality of his performances in some roles. He told Tynan this was because he was influenced as a young man by Douglas Fairbanks, Ramon Navarro and John Barrymore in films, and Barrymore on stage as Hamlet: "tremendously athletic. I admired that greatly, all of us did. ... One thought of oneself, idiotically, skinny as I was, as a sort of Tarzan." According to Morley, Gielgud was widely considered "the best actor in the world from the neck up and Olivier from the neck down." Olivier described the contrast thus: "I've always thought that we were the reverses of the same coin... the top half John, all spirituality, all beauty, all abstract things; and myself as all earth, blood, humanity."

Together with Richardson and Gielgud, Olivier was internationally recognised as one of the "great trinity of theatrical knights" who dominated the British stage during the middle and later decades of the 20th century. In an obituary tribute in "The Times", Bernard Levin wrote, "What we have lost with Laurence Olivier is "glory". He reflected it in his greatest roles; indeed he walked clad in it—you could practically see it glowing around him like a nimbus... no one will ever play the roles he played as he played them; no one will replace the splendour that he gave his native land with his genius." Billington commented:
After Olivier's death, Gielgud reflected, "He followed in the theatrical tradition of Kean and Irving. He respected tradition in the theatre, but he also took great delight in breaking tradition, which is what made him so unique. He was gifted, brilliant, and one of the great controversial figures of our time in theatre, which is a virtue and not a vice at all."

Olivier said in 1963 that he believed he was born to be an actor, but his colleague Peter Ustinov disagreed; he commented that although Olivier's great contemporaries were clearly predestined for the stage, "Larry could have been a notable ambassador, a considerable minister, a redoubtable cleric. At his worst, he would have acted the parts more ably than they are usually lived." The director David Ayliff agreed that acting did not come instinctively to Olivier as it did to his great rivals. He observed, "Ralph was a natural actor, he couldn't stop being a perfect actor; Olivier did it through sheer hard work and determination." The American actor William Redfield had a similar view:
In comparing Olivier and the other leading actors of his generation, Ustinov wrote, "It is of course vain to talk of who is and who is not the greatest actor. There is simply no such thing as a greatest actor, or painter or composer". Nonetheless, some colleagues, particularly film actors such as Spencer Tracy, Humphrey Bogart and Lauren Bacall, came to regard Olivier as the finest of his peers. Peter Hall, though acknowledging Olivier as the head of the theatrical profession, thought Richardson the greater actor. Others, such as the critic Michael Coveney, awarded the palm to Gielgud. Olivier's claim to theatrical greatness lay not only in his acting, but as, in Hall's words, "the supreme man of the theatre of our time", pioneering Britain's National Theatre. As Bragg identified, "no one doubts that the National is perhaps his most enduring monument".



</doc>
<doc id="142841" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=142841" title="Ronald Colman">
Ronald Colman

Ronald Charles Colman (9 February 1891 – 19 May 1958) was an English actor, popular during the 1920s, 1930s, and 1940s. He won an Academy Award for Best Actor for "A Double Life" (1947) and received nominations for "Random Harvest" (1942), "Bulldog Drummond" (1929) and "Condemned" (1929). Colman starred in several classic films, including "A Tale of Two Cities" (1935), "Lost Horizon" (1937) and "The Prisoner of Zenda" (1937). He also played the starring role in the Technicolor classic "Kismet" (1944), with Marlene Dietrich, which was nominated for four Academy Awards.

Colman has two stars on the Hollywood Walk of Fame for his contributions to motion pictures and television.

Ronald Charles Colman was born in Richmond, Surrey, England, the second son and fourth child of Charles Colman and his wife Marjory Read Fraser. His siblings comprised Eric, Edith and Marjorie. He was educated at boarding school in Littlehampton, where he discovered that he enjoyed acting, despite his shyness. He intended to study engineering at Cambridge, but his father's sudden death from pneumonia in 1907 made it financially impossible.

He became a well-known amateur actor and was a member of the West Middlesex Dramatic Society in 1908–09. He made his first appearance on the professional stage in 1914.

While working as a clerk at the British Steamship Company in the City of London, he joined the London Scottish Regiment in 1909 as a Territorial Army soldier, and on being mobilised at the outbreak of the First World War, crossed the English Channel to France in September 1914 to take part in the fighting on the Western Front. On 31 October 1914, at the Battle of Messines, Colman was seriously wounded by shrapnel in his ankle, which gave him a limp that he would attempt to hide throughout the rest of his acting career. As a consequence, he was invalided out of the British Army in 1915. His fellow Hollywood actors Claude Rains, Herbert Marshall, Cedric Hardwicke and Basil Rathbone all saw service with the London Scottish in the war.

Colman had sufficiently recovered from wartime injuries to appear at the London Coliseum on 19 June 1916, as Rahmat Sheikh in "The Maharani of Arakan", with Lena Ashwell; at the Playhouse in December that year as Stephen Weatherbee in the Charles Goddard/Paul Dickey play "The Misleading Lady"; at the Court Theatre in March 1917 as Webber in "Partnership". At the same theatre the following year he appeared in Eugène Brieux's "Damaged Goods". At the Ambassadors Theatre in February 1918 he played George Lubin in "The Little Brother". During 1918, he toured as David Goldsmith in "The Bubble". 

In 1920, Colman went to America and toured with Robert Warwick in "The Dauntless Three", and subsequently toured with Fay Bainter in "East is West". At the Booth Theatre in New York in January 1921 he played the Temple Priest in William Archer's play "The Green Goddess". With George Arliss at the 39th Street Theatre in August 1921 he appeared as Charles in "The Nightcap". In September 1922 he had great success as Alain Sergyll at the Empire Theatre (New York City) in "La Tendresse".

Colman had first appeared in films in Britain in 1917 and 1919 for director Cecil Hepworth, and subsequently with the old Broadwest Film Company in "Snow in the Desert". While appearing on stage in New York in "La Tendresse", Director Henry King saw him and engaged him as the leading man in the 1923 film "The White Sister", opposite Lillian Gish. He was an immediate success. Thereafter Colman virtually abandoned the stage for film. He became a very popular silent film star in both romantic and adventure films, among them "The Dark Angel" (1925), "Stella Dallas" (1926), "Beau Geste" (1927) and "The Winning of Barbara Worth" (1926). His dark hair and eyes and his athletic and riding ability (he did most of his own stunts until late in his career) led reviewers to describe him as a "Valentino type". He was often cast in similar, exotic roles. Towards the end of the silent era, Colman was teamed with Hungarian actress Vilma Bánky under Samuel Goldwyn; the two were a popular film team rivalling Greta Garbo and John Gilbert.

Although he was a huge success in silent films, he was unable to capitalise on one of his chief assets until the advent of the talking picture, "his beautifully modulated and cultured voice." also described as "a bewitching, finely-modulated, resonant voice." Colman was often viewed as a suave English gentleman, whose voice embodied chivalry and mirrored the image of a "Stereotypical English gentleman." Commenting on Colman's appeal, English film critic David Shipman stated that Colman was "'the dream lover - calm, dignified, trustworthy. Although he was a lithe figure in adventure stories, his glamour - which was genuine - came from his respectability; he was an aristocratic figure without being aloof.'"

His first major talkie success was in 1930, when he was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Actor for two roles – "Condemned" and "Bulldog Drummond". He thereafter appeared in a number of notable films: "Raffles" in 1930, "The Masquerader" in 1933, "Clive of India" and "A Tale of Two Cities" in 1935, "Under Two Flags", "The Prisoner of Zenda" and "Lost Horizon" in 1937, "If I Were King" in 1938 and "Random Harvest" and "The Talk of the Town" in 1942. He won the Best Actor Oscar in 1948 for "A Double Life." He next starred in a screwball comedy, 1950's "Champagne for Caesar".

At the time of his death, Colman was contracted by Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer for the lead role in "Village of the Damned". However, Colman died and the film became a British production starring George Sanders, who had married Colman's widow, Benita Hume.

Colman has been mentioned in many novels, but he is specifically mentioned in Ralph Ellison's "Invisible Man" because of his charming, well-known voice. The main character of this novel says that he wishes he could have a voice like Colman's because it is charming, and relates the voice to that of a gentleman or a man from Esquire magazine. Colman was indeed very well known for his voice. Encyclopædia Britannica says that Colman had a "resonant, mellifluous speaking voice with a unique, pleasing timbre". Along with his charming voice, Colman had a very confident performing manner that helped make him a major star of sound films.

Beginning in 1945, Colman made many guest appearances on "The Jack Benny Program" on radio, alongside his second wife, stage and screen actress Benita Hume. Their comedy work as Benny's perpetually exasperated next-door neighbours led to their own radio comedy "The Halls of Ivy" from 1950 to 1952, created by "Fibber McGee & Molly" mastermind Don Quinn, on which the Colmans played the literate, charming president of a middle American college and his former-actress wife. Listeners were surprised to discover that the episode of 24 January 1951, "The Goya Bequest"—a story examining the bequest of a Goya painting that was suspected of being a fraud hyped by its late owner to avoid paying customs duties when bringing it to the United States—was written by Colman himself, who poked fun at his accomplishment while taking a rare turn giving the evening's credits at the show's conclusion.

"The Halls of Ivy" ran on NBC radio from 1950 to 1952, then moved to CBS television for the 1954–55 season.

Colman was also the host and occasional star of the syndicate anthology "Favorite Story", (1946-1949). Of note was his narration and portrayal of Scrooge in a 1948 production of "A Christmas Carol".

Colman died on 19 May 1958, aged 67, from acute emphysema in Santa Barbara, California, and was interred in the Santa Barbara Cemetery. He had a daughter, Juliet Benita Colman (born 1944), by his second wife Benita Hume.

Colman was nominated three times for the Academy Award for Best Actor. At the 3rd Academy Awards ceremony he received a single nomination for his work in two films; "Bulldog Drummond" (1929) and "Condemned" (1929). He was nominated again for "Random Harvest" (1942), before winning for "A Double Life" (1947), where he played the role of Anthony John, an actor playing Othello who comes to identify with the character. He also won the Golden Globe award for Best Actor in 1947 for his role in "A Double Life". In 2002, Colman's Oscar statuette was sold at auction by Christie's for US$174,500.

Colman is a recipient of the George Eastman Award, given by George Eastman House for distinguished contribution to the art of film.

Colman has two stars on the Hollywood Walk of Fame in Los Angeles, one for motion pictures at 6801 Hollywood Blvd. and one for television at 1623 Vine Street.

He is the subject of a biography written by his daughter Juliet Benita Colman in 1975, "Ronald Colman: A Very Private Person".





</doc>
<doc id="16046" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16046" title="James Cagney">
James Cagney

James Francis Cagney Jr. (July 17, 1899March 30, 1986) was an American actor and dancer, both on stage and in film, though he had his greatest impact in film. Known for his consistently energetic performances, distinctive vocal style, and deadpan comic timing, he won acclaim and major awards for a wide variety of performances. He is best remembered for playing multifaceted tough guys in movies such as "The Public Enemy" (1931), "Taxi!" (1932), "Angels with Dirty Faces" (1938), and "White Heat" (1949), and was typecast or limited by this view earlier in his career. In 1999, the American Film Institute ranked him eighth among its list of greatest male stars of Classic Hollywood Cinema. Orson Welles said of Cagney, "[he was] maybe the greatest actor who ever appeared in front of a camera", and Stanley Kubrick considered him to be one of the best actors of all time.

In his first professional acting performance, Cagney danced costumed as a woman in the chorus line of the revue "Every Sailor", in 1919. He spent several years in vaudeville as a dancer and comedian, until he got his first major acting part in 1925. He secured several other roles, receiving good notices, before landing the lead in the 1929 play "Penny Arcade". After rave reviews, Warner Bros. signed him for an initial $500-a-week, three-week contract to reprise his role; this was quickly extended to a seven-year contract.

Cagney's seventh film, "The Public Enemy", became one of the most influential gangster movies of the period. Notable for a famous scene in which Cagney pushes a grapefruit against Mae Clarke's face, the film thrust him into the spotlight. He became one of Hollywood's biggest stars and one of Warner Bros.' biggest contracts. In 1938, he received his first Academy Award for Best Actor nomination, for "Angels with Dirty Faces", for his subtle portrayal of the tough guy/man-child Rocky Sullivan. In 1942, Cagney won the Oscar for his energetic portrayal of George M. Cohan in "Yankee Doodle Dandy". He was nominated a third time in 1955 for "Love Me or Leave Me". Cagney retired from acting and dancing in 1961 to spend time on his farm with his family. He came out of retirement 20 years later for a part in the movie "Ragtime" (1981), mainly to aid his recovery from a stroke.

Cagney walked out on Warner Bros. several times over the course of his career, each time returning on much improved personal and artistic terms. In 1935, he sued Warner for breach of contract and won. This was one of the first times an actor prevailed over a studio on a contract issue. He worked for an independent film company for a year while the suit was being settled—and established his own production company, Cagney Productions, in 1942, before returning to Warner four years later. In reference to Cagney's refusal to be pushed around, Jack L. Warner called him "the Professional Againster". Cagney also made numerous morale-boosting troop tours before and during World War II and was president of the Screen Actors Guild for two years.

James Francis "Jimmy" Cagney was born on the Lower East Side of Manhattan in New York City. His biographers disagree as to the actual location: either on the corner of Avenue D and 8th Street or in a top-floor apartment at 391 East Eighth Street, the address that his birth certificate indicates. His father, James Francis Cagney Sr. (1875–1918), was of Irish descent. At the time of his son's birth, he was a bartender and amateur boxer, though on Cagney's birth certificate, he is listed as a telegraphist. His mother was Carolyn (née Nelson; 1877–1945); her father was a Norwegian ship captain while her mother was Irish.

Cagney was the second of seven children, two of whom died within months of birth. He was sickly as a young child—so much so that his mother feared he would die before he could be baptized. He later attributed his sickness to the poverty his family had to endure. The family moved twice while he was still young, first to East 79th Street, and then to East 96th Street. He was confirmed at St. Francis de Sales Roman Catholic Church in Manhattan, where he would eventually have his funeral service.

The red-haired, blue-eyed Cagney graduated from Stuyvesant High School in New York City, in 1918, and attended Columbia College of Columbia University, where he intended to major in Art. He also took German and joined the Student Army Training Corps but dropped out after one semester, returning home upon the death of his father during the 1918 flu pandemic.

Cagney held a variety of jobs early in his life, giving all his earnings to his family: junior architect, copy boy for the "New York Sun", book custodian at the New York Public Library, bellhop, draughtsman, and night doorkeeper. While Cagney was working for the New York Public Library, he met Florence James, who helped him into an acting career. Cagney believed in hard work, later stating, "It was good for me. I feel sorry for the kid who has too cushy a time of it. Suddenly he has to come face-to-face with the realities of life without any mama or papa to do his thinking for him."

He started tap dancing as a boy (a skill that eventually contributed to his Academy Award) and was nicknamed "Cellar-Door Cagney" after his habit of dancing on slanted cellar doors. He was a good street fighter, defending his older brother Harry, a medical student, when necessary. He engaged in amateur boxing, and was a runner-up for the New York State lightweight title. His coaches encouraged him to turn professional, but his mother would not allow it. He also played semiprofessional baseball for a local team, and entertained dreams of playing in the Major Leagues.

His introduction to films was unusual. When visiting an aunt who lived in Brooklyn opposite Vitagraph Studios, Cagney would climb over the fence to watch the filming of John Bunny movies. He became involved in amateur dramatics, starting as a scenery boy for a Chinese pantomime at Lenox Hill Neighborhood House, one of the first settlement houses in the nation, where his brother Harry performed and his soon-to-be friend, Florence James, directed. He was initially content working behind the scenes and had no interest in performing. One night, however, Harry became ill, and although Cagney was not an understudy, his photographic memory of rehearsals enabled him to stand in for his brother without making a single mistake. Therefore, Florence James has the unique distinction of being the first director to put him on a stage. Afterward, he joined a number of companies as a performer in a variety of roles.

While working at Wanamaker's Department Store in 1919, Cagney learned, from a colleague who had seen him dance, of a role in the upcoming production "Every Sailor". A wartime play in which the chorus was made up of servicemen dressed as women, it was originally titled "Every Woman". Cagney auditioned for the role of a chorus girl, despite considering it a waste of time; he knew only one dance step, the complicated Peabody, but he knew it perfectly. This was enough to convince the producers that he could dance, and he copied the other dancers' moves while waiting to go on. He did not find it odd to play a woman, nor was he embarrassed. He later recalled how he was able to shed his own natural shy persona when he stepped onto the stage: "For there I am not myself. I am not that fellow, Jim Cagney, at all. I certainly lost all consciousness of him when I put on skirts, wig, paint, powder, feathers and spangles."

Had Cagney's mother had her way, his stage career would have ended when he quit "Every Sailor" after two months; proud as she was of his performance, she preferred that he get an education. Cagney appreciated the $35 a week he was paid, which he called "a mountain of money for me in those worrisome days." In deference to his mother's worries, he got employment as a brokerage house runner. This did not stop him looking for more stage work, however, and he went on to successfully audition for a chorus part in the William B. Friedlander musical "Pitter Patter", for which he earned $55 a week—he sent $40 to his mother each week. So strong was his habit of holding down more than one job at a time, he also worked as a dresser for one of the leads, portered the casts' luggage, and understudied for the lead. Among the chorus line performers was 16-year-old Frances Willard "Billie" Vernon, whom he married in 1922.

The show began Cagney's 10-year association with vaudeville and Broadway. Cagney and his wife were among the early residents of Free Acres, a social experiment established by Bolton Hall in Berkeley Heights, New Jersey.

"Pitter Patter" was not hugely successful, but it did well enough to run for 32 weeks, enabling Cagney to join the vaudeville circuit. He and Vernon toured separately with a number of different troupes, reuniting as "Vernon and Nye" to do simple comedy routines and musical numbers. "Nye" was a rearrangement of the last syllable of Cagney's surname. One of the troupes Cagney joined was Parker, Rand, and Leach, taking over the spot vacated when Archie Leach—who later changed his name to Cary Grant—left.

After years of touring and struggling to make money, Cagney and Vernon moved to Hawthorne, California, in 1924, partly for Cagney to meet his new mother-in-law, who had just moved there from Chicago, and partly to investigate breaking into the movies. Their train fares were paid for by a friend, the press officer of "Pitter Patter", who was also desperate to act. They were not successful at first; the dance studio Cagney set up had few clients and folded, and Vernon and he toured the studios, but garnered no interest. Eventually, they borrowed some money and headed back to New York via Chicago and Milwaukee, enduring failure along the way when they attempted to make money on the stage.
Cagney secured his first significant nondancing role in 1925. He played a young tough guy in the three-act play "Outside Looking In" by Maxwell Anderson, earning $200 a week. As with "Pitter Patter", Cagney went to the audition with little confidence he would get the part. He had no experience with drama at this point. Cagney felt that he only got the role because his hair was redder than that of Alan Bunce, the only other red-headed performer in New York. Both the play and Cagney received good reviews; "Life" magazine wrote, "Mr. Cagney, in a less spectacular role [than his co-star] makes a few minutes silence during his mock-trial scene something that many a more established actor might watch with profit." Burns Mantle wrote that it "...contained the most honest acting now to be seen in New York."

Following the show's four-month run, Cagney went back to vaudeville for the next few years. He achieved varied success, but after appearing in "Outside Looking In", the Cagneys were more financially secure. During this period, he met George M. Cohan, whom he later portrayed in "Yankee Doodle Dandy", though they never spoke.

Cagney secured the lead role in the 1926–27 season West End production of "Broadway" by George Abbott. The show's management insisted that he copy Broadway lead Lee Tracy's performance, despite Cagney's discomfort in doing so, but the day before the show sailed for England, they decided to replace him. This was a devastating turn of events for Cagney; apart from the logistical difficulties this presented—the couple's luggage was in the hold of the ship and they had given up their apartment. He almost quit show business. As Vernon recalled, "Jimmy said that it was all over. He made up his mind that he would get a job doing something else."

The Cagneys had run-of-the-play contracts, which lasted as long as the play did. Vernon was in the chorus line of the show, and with help from the Actors' Equity Association, Cagney understudied Tracy on the Broadway show, providing them with a desperately needed steady income. Cagney also established a dance school for professionals, then landed a part in the play "Women Go On Forever", directed by John Cromwell, which ran for four months. By the end of the run, Cagney was exhausted from acting and running the dance school.

He had built a reputation as an innovative teacher, so when he was cast as the lead in "Grand Street Follies of 1928", he was also appointed the choreographer. The show received rave reviews and was followed by "Grand Street Follies of 1929". These roles led to a part in George Kelly's "Maggie the Magnificent", a play the critics disliked, though they liked Cagney's performance. Cagney saw this role (and "Women Go on Forever") as significant because of the talented directors he met. He learned "...what a director was for and what a director could do. They were directors who could play all the parts in the play better than the actors cast for them."

Playing opposite Cagney in "Maggie the Magnificent" was Joan Blondell, who starred again with him a few months later in Marie Baumer's new play "Penny Arcade". While the critics panned "Penny Arcade", they praised Cagney and Blondell. Al Jolson, sensing film potential, bought the rights for $20,000. He then sold the play to Warner Bros., with the stipulation that they cast Cagney and Blondell in the film version. Retitled "Sinners' Holiday", the film was released in 1930. Cagney was given a $500-a-week, three-week contract. 

In the film, he portrays Harry Delano, a tough guy who becomes a killer, but generates sympathy because of his unfortunate upbringing. This role of the sympathetic "bad" guy was a recurring character type for Cagney throughout his career. During filming of "Sinners' Holiday", he also demonstrated the stubbornness that characterized his work attitude. He later recalled an argument he had with director John Adolfi about a line: "There was a line in the show where I was supposed to be crying on my mother's breast... [The line] was 'I'm your baby, ain't I?' I refused to say it. Adolfi said 'I'm going to tell Zanuck.' I said 'I don't give a shit what you tell him, I'm not going to say that line.'" They took the line out.

Despite this outburst, the studio liked him, and before his three-week contract was up—while the film was still shooting—they gave Cagney a three-week extension, which was followed by a full seven-year contract at $400 a week. The contract, however, allowed Warners to drop him at the end of any 40-week period, effectively only guaranteeing him 40 weeks income at a time. As when he was growing up, Cagney shared his income with his family. Cagney received good reviews, and immediately starred in another gangster role in "The Doorway to Hell". The film was a financial hit, helping cement Cagney's growing reputation. He made four more movies before his breakthrough role.

Warner Brothers′ succession of gangster movie hits, in particular "Little Caesar" with Edward G. Robinson, culminated with the 1931 film "The Public Enemy". Due to the strong reviews in his short film career, Cagney was cast as nice-guy Matt Doyle, opposite Edward Woods as Tom Powers. However, after the initial rushes, each was reassigned the other's part. The film cost only $151,000 to make, but it became one of the first low-budget films to gross $1 million.

Cagney received widespread praise for his role. The "New York Herald Tribune" described his performance as "...the most ruthless, unsentimental appraisal of the meanness of a petty killer the cinema has yet devised." He received top billing after the film, but while he acknowledged the importance of the role to his career, he always disputed that it changed the way heroes and leading men were portrayed; he cited Clark Gable's slapping of Barbara Stanwyck six months earlier (in "Night Nurse") as more important. "Night Nurse" was actually released three months after "The Public Enemy", and Gable punched Stanwyck in the film, knocking her character unconscious, then carried her across the hall, where she woke up later.

Many critics view the scene in which Cagney pushes a grapefruit into Mae Clarke's face as one of the most famous moments in movie history. The scene itself was a late addition, and who thought of the idea is a matter of debate. Producer Darryl Zanuck claimed he thought of it in a script conference, director William Wellman said the idea came to him when he saw the grapefruit on the table during the shoot, and writers Glasmon and Bright claimed it was based on the real life of gangster Hymie Weiss, who threw an omelette into his girlfriend's face. Cagney himself usually cited the writers' version, but the fruit's victim, Clarke, agreed that it was Wellman's idea, saying, "I'm sorry I ever agreed to do the grapefruit bit. I never dreamed it would be shown in the movie. Director Bill Wellman thought of the idea suddenly. It wasn't even written into the script.".

However, according to Turner Classic Movies (TCM), the grapefruit scene was a practical joke that Cagney and costar Mae Clarke decided to play on the crew while the cameras were rolling. Wellman liked it so much that he left it in. TCM also notes that the scene made Clarke's ex-husband, Lew Brice, very happy. "He saw the film repeatedly just to see that scene, and was often shushed by angry patrons when his delighted laughter got too loud."

Cagney's stubbornness became well known behind the scenes, not least after his refusal to join in a 100%participation-free charity drive pushed by Douglas Fairbanks, Jr. Cagney did not object to donating money to charity, but rather to being forced to. Already he had acquired the nickname "The Professional Againster".

Warner Bros. was quick to team its two rising gangster stars—Edward G. Robinson and Cagney—for the 1931 film "Smart Money". So keen was the studio to follow up the success of Robinson's "Little Caesar" that Cagney actually shot "Smart Money" (for which he received second billing in a supporting role) at the same time as "The Public Enemy". As in "The Public Enemy", Cagney was required to be physically violent to a woman on screen, a signal that Warner Bros. was keen to keep Cagney in the public eye. This time, he slapped co-star Evalyn Knapp.

With the introduction of the United States Motion Picture Production Code of 1930, and particularly its edicts concerning on-screen violence, Warners allowed Cagney a change of pace. They cast him in the comedy "Blonde Crazy", again opposite Blondell. As he completed filming, "The Public Enemy" was filling cinemas with all-night showings. Cagney began to compare his pay with his peers, thinking his contract allowed for salary adjustments based on the success of his films. Warner Bros. disagreed, however, and refused to give him a raise. The studio heads also insisted that Cagney continue promoting their films, even ones he was not in, which he opposed. Cagney moved back to New York, leaving his brother Bill to look after his apartment.

While Cagney was in New York, his brother, who had effectively become his agent, angled for a substantial pay raise and more personal freedom for his brother. The success of "The Public Enemy" and "Blonde Crazy" forced Warner Bros.' hand. They eventually offered Cagney a contract for $1000 a week. Cagney's first film upon returning from New York was 1932's "Taxi!". The film is notable for not only being the first time that Cagney danced on screen, but it was also the last time he allowed himself to be shot at with live ammunition (a relatively common occurrence at the time, as blank cartridges and squibs were considered too expensive and hard to find to use in most motion picture filming). He had been shot at in "The Public Enemy", but during filming for "Taxi!", he was almost hit.

In his opening scene, Cagney spoke fluent Yiddish, a language he had picked up during his boyhood in New York City. Critics praised the film. "Taxi!" was the source of one of Cagney's most misquoted lines; he never actually said, "MMMmmm, you dirty rat!", a line commonly used by impressionists. The closest he got to it in the film was, "Come out and take it, you dirty, yellow-bellied rat, or I'll give it to you through the door!" The film was swiftly followed by "The Crowd Roars" and "Winner Take All".

Despite his success, Cagney remained dissatisfied with his contract. He wanted more money for his successful films, but he also offered to take a smaller salary should his star wane. Warner Bros. refused, so Cagney once again walked out. He held out for $4000 a week, the same salary as Edward G. Robinson, Douglas Fairbanks, Jr., and Kay Francis. Warner Bros. refused to cave in this time, and suspended Cagney. Cagney announced that he would do his next three pictures for free if they canceled the five years remaining on his contract. He also threatened to quit Hollywood and go back to Columbia University to follow his brothers into medicine. After six months of suspension, Frank Capra brokered a deal that increased Cagney's salary to around $3000 a week, and guaranteed top billing and no more than four films a year.

Having learned about the block-booking studio system that almost guaranteed the studios huge profits, Cagney was determined to spread the wealth. He regularly sent money and goods to old friends from his neighborhood, though he did not generally make this known. His insistence on no more than four films a year was based on his having witnessed actors—even teenagers—regularly being worked 100 hours a week to turn out more films. This experience was an integral reason for his involvement in forming the Screen Actors Guild in 1933.
Cagney returned to the studio and made "Hard to Handle" in 1933. This was followed by a steady stream of films, including the highly regarded "Footlight Parade", which gave Cagney the chance to return to his song-and-dance roots. The film includes show-stopping scenes with Busby Berkeley-choreographed routines. His next notable film was 1934's "Here Comes the Navy", which paired him with Pat O'Brien for the first time. The two would have an enduring friendship.

In 1935, Cagney was listed as one of the Top Ten Moneymakers in Hollywood for the first time, and was cast more frequently in nongangster roles; he played a lawyer who joins the FBI in "G-Men", and he also took on his first, and only, Shakespearean role, as top-billed Nick Bottom in "A Midsummer Night's Dream" alongside Joe E. Brown as Flute and Mickey Rooney as Puck

Cagney's last movie in 1935 was "Ceiling Zero", his third film with Pat O'Brien. O'Brien received top billing, which was a clear breach of Cagney's contract. This, combined with the fact that Cagney had made five movies in 1934, again against his contract terms, caused him to bring legal proceedings against Warner Bros. for breach of contract. The dispute dragged on for several months. Cagney received calls from David Selznick and Sam Goldwyn, but neither felt in a position to offer him work while the dispute went on. Meanwhile, while being represented by his brother William in court, Cagney went back to New York to search for a country property where he could indulge his passion for farming.

Cagney spent most of the next year on his farm, and went back to work only when Edward L. Alperson from Grand National Films, a newly established, independent studio, approached him to make movies for $100,000 a film and 10% of the profits. Cagney made two films for Grand National: "Great Guy" and "Something to Sing About". He received good reviews for both, but overall the production quality was not up to Warner Bros. standards, and the films did not do well. A third film, "Dynamite", was planned, but Grand National ran out of money.

Cagney also became involved in political causes, and in 1936, agreed to sponsor the Hollywood Anti-Nazi League. Unknown to Cagney, the League was in fact a front organization for the Communist International (Comintern), which sought to enlist support for the Soviet Union and its foreign policies.
The courts eventually decided the Warner Bros. lawsuit in Cagney's favor. He had done what many thought unthinkable: taking on the studios and winning. Not only did he win, but Warner Bros. also knew that he was still their foremost box office draw and invited him back for a five-year, $150,000-a-film deal, with no more than two pictures a year. Cagney also had full say over what films he did and did not make. Additionally, William Cagney was guaranteed the position of assistant producer for the movies in which his brother starred.

Cagney had demonstrated the power of the walkout in keeping the studios to their word. He later explained his reasons, saying, "I walked out because I depended on the studio heads to keep their word on this, that or other promise, and when the promise was not kept, my only recourse was to deprive them of my services." Cagney himself acknowledged the importance of the walkout for other actors in breaking the dominance of the studio system. Normally, when a star walked out, the time he or she was absent was added onto the end of an already long contract, as happened with Olivia de Havilland and Bette Davis. Cagney, however, walked out and came back to a better contract. Many in Hollywood watched the case closely for hints of how future contracts might be handled.

Artistically, the Grand National experiment was a success for Cagney, who was able to move away from his traditional Warner Bros. tough guy roles to more sympathetic characters. How far he could have experimented and developed will never be known, but back in the Warner fold, he was once again playing tough guys.

Cagney's two films of 1938, "Boy Meets Girl" and "Angels with Dirty Faces", both costarred Pat O'Brien. The former had Cagney in a comedy role, and received mixed reviews. Warner Bros. had allowed Cagney his change of pace, but was keen to get him back to playing tough guys, which was more lucrative. Ironically, the script for "Angels" was one that Cagney had hoped to do while with Grand National, but the studio had been unable to secure funding.

Cagney starred as Rocky Sullivan, a gangster fresh out of jail and looking for his former associate, played by Humphrey Bogart, who owes him money. While revisiting his old haunts, he runs into his old friend Jerry Connolly, played by O'Brien, who is now a priest concerned about the Dead End Kids' futures, particularly as they idolize Rocky. After a messy shootout, Sullivan is eventually captured by the police and sentenced to death in the electric chair. Connolly pleads with Rocky to "turn yellow" on his way to the chair so the Kids will lose their admiration for him, and hopefully avoid turning to crime. Sullivan refuses, but on his way to his execution, he breaks down and begs for his life. It is unclear whether this cowardice is real or just feigned for the Kids' benefit. Cagney himself refused to say, insisting he liked the ambiguity. The film is regarded by many as one of Cagney's finest, and garnered him an Academy Award for Best Actor nomination for 1938. He lost to Spencer Tracy in "Boys Town". Cagney had been considered for the role, but lost out on it due to his typecasting. (He also lost the role of Notre Dame football coach Knute Rockne in "Knute Rockne, All American" to his friend Pat O'Brien for the same reason.) Cagney did, however, win that year's New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Actor.

His earlier insistence on not filming with live ammunition proved to be a good decision. Having been told while filming "Angels with Dirty Faces" that he would be doing a scene with real machine gun bullets (a common practice in the Hollywood of the time), Cagney refused and insisted the shots be added afterwards. As it turned out, a ricocheting bullet passed through exactly where his head would have been.

During his first year back at Warner Bros., Cagney became the studio's highest earner, making $324,000. He completed his first decade of movie-making in 1939 with "The Roaring Twenties", his first film with Raoul Walsh and his last with Bogart. After "The Roaring Twenties", it would be a decade before Cagney made another gangster film. Cagney again received good reviews; Graham Greene stated, "Mr. Cagney, of the bull-calf brow, is as always a superb and witty actor". "The Roaring Twenties" was the last film in which Cagney's character's violence was explained by poor upbringing, or his environment, as was the case in "The Public Enemy". From that point on, violence was attached to mania, as in "White Heat". In 1939, Cagney was second to only Gary Cooper in the national acting wage stakes, earning $368,333.
His next notable role was as George M. Cohan in "Yankee Doodle Dandy", a film Cagney "took great pride in" and considered his best. Producer Hal Wallis said that having seen Cohan in "I'd Rather Be Right", he never considered anyone other than Cagney for the part. Cagney, though, insisted that Fred Astaire had been the first choice, but turned it down.

Filming began the day after the attack on Pearl Harbor, and the cast and crew worked in a "patriotic frenzy" as the United States' involvement in World War II gave the cast and crew a feeling that "they might be sending the last message from the free world", according to actress Rosemary DeCamp. Cohan was given a private showing of the film shortly before his death, and thanked Cagney "for a wonderful job". A paid première, with seats ranging from $25 to $25,000, raised $5,750,000 for war bonds for the US treasury.
Many critics of the time and since have declared it Cagney's best film, drawing parallels between Cohan and Cagney; they both began their careers in vaudeville, struggled for years before reaching the peak of their profession, were surrounded with family and married early, and both had a wife who was happy to sit back while he went on to stardom. The film was nominated for eight Academy Awards and won three, including Cagney's for Best Actor. In his acceptance speech, Cagney said, "I've always maintained that in this business, you're only as good as the other fellow thinks you are. It's nice to know that you people thought I did a good job. And don't forget that it was a good part, too."

Cagney announced in March 1942 that his brother William and he were setting up Cagney Productions to release films though United Artists. Free of Warner Bros. again, Cagney spent some time relaxing on his farm in Martha's Vineyard before volunteering to join the USO. He spent several weeks touring the US, entertaining troops with vaudeville routines and scenes from "Yankee Doodle Dandy". In September 1942, he was elected president of the Screen Actors Guild.

Almost a year after its creation, Cagney Productions produced its first film, "Johnny Come Lately", in 1943. While the major studios were producing patriotic war movies, Cagney was determined to continue dispelling his tough-guy image, so he produced a movie that was a "complete and exhilarating exposition of the Cagney 'alter-ego' on film". According to Cagney, the film "made money but it was no great winner", and reviews varied from excellent ("Time") to poor (New York's "PM").
Following the film's completion, Cagney went back to the USO and toured US military bases in the UK. He refused to give interviews to the British press, preferring to concentrate on rehearsals and performances. He gave several performances a day for the Army Signal Corps of "The American Cavalcade of Dance", which consisted of a history of American dance, from the earliest days to Fred Astaire, and culminated with dances from "Yankee Doodle Dandy".

The second movie Cagney's company produced was "Blood on the Sun". Insisting on doing his own stunts, Cagney required judo training from expert Ken Kuniyuki and Jack Halloran, a former policeman. The Cagneys had hoped that an action film would appeal more to audiences, but it fared worse at the box office than "Johnny Come Lately". At this time, Cagney heard of young war hero Audie Murphy, who had appeared on the cover of "Life" magazine. Cagney thought that Murphy had the looks to be a movie star, and suggested that he come to Hollywood. Cagney felt, however, that Murphy could not act, and his contract was loaned out and then sold.

While negotiating the rights for his third independent film, Cagney starred in 20th Century Fox's "13 Rue Madeleine" for $300,000 for two months of work. The wartime spy film was a success, and Cagney was keen to begin production of his new project, an adaptation of William Saroyan's Broadway play "The Time of Your Life". Saroyan himself loved the film, but it was a commercial disaster, costing the company half a million dollars to make; audiences again struggled to accept Cagney in a nontough-guy role.

Cagney Productions was in serious trouble; poor returns from the produced films, and a legal dispute with Sam Goldwyn Studio over a rental agreement forced Cagney back to Warner Bros. He signed a distribution-production deal with the studio for the film "White Heat", effectively making Cagney Productions a unit of Warner Bros.

Cagney's portrayal of Cody Jarrett in the 1949 film "White Heat" is one of his most memorable. Cinema had changed in the 10 years since Walsh last directed Cagney (in "The Strawberry Blonde"), and the actor's portrayal of gangsters had also changed. Unlike Tom Powers in "The Public Enemy", Jarrett was portrayed as a raging lunatic with few if any sympathetic qualities. In the 18 intervening years, Cagney's hair had begun to gray, and he developed a paunch for the first time. He was no longer a romantic commodity, and this was reflected in his performance. Cagney himself had the idea of playing Jarrett as psychotic; he later stated, "it was essentially a cheapie one-two-three-four kind of thing, so I suggested we make him nuts. It was agreed so we put in all those fits and headaches."

Cagney's final lines in the film – "Made it, Ma! Top of the world!" – was voted the 18th-greatest movie line by the American Film Institute. Likewise, Jarrett's explosion of rage in prison on being told of his mother's death is widely hailed as one of Cagney's most memorable performances. Some of the extras on set actually became terrified of the actor because of his violent portrayal. Cagney attributed the performance to his father's alcoholic rages, which he had witnessed as a child, as well as someone that he had seen on a visit to a mental hospital.
The film was a critical success, though some critics wondered about the social impact of a character that they saw as sympathetic. Cagney was still struggling against his gangster typecasting. He said to a journalist, "It's what the people want me to do. Some day, though, I'd like to make another movie that kids could go and see." However, Warner Bros., perhaps searching for another "Yankee Doodle Dandy", assigned Cagney a musical for his next picture, 1950's "The West Point Story" with Doris Day, an actress he admired.

His next film, "Kiss Tomorrow Goodbye", was another gangster movie, which was the first by Cagney Productions since its acquisition. While compared unfavorably to "White Heat" by critics, it was fairly successful at the box office, with $500,000 going straight to Cagney Productions' bankers to pay off their losses. Cagney Productions was not a great success, however, and in 1953, after William Cagney produced his last film, "A Lion Is in the Streets", the company came to an end.

Cagney's next notable role was the 1955 film "Love Me or Leave Me", his third with Day. Cagney played Martin "Moe the Gimp" Snyder, a lame Jewish-American gangster from Chicago, a part Spencer Tracy had turned down. Cagney described the script as "that extremely rare thing, the perfect script". When the film was released, Snyder reportedly asked how Cagney had so accurately copied his limp, but Cagney himself insisted he had not, having based it on personal observation of other people when they limped: "What I did was very simple. I just slapped my foot down as I turned it out while walking. That's all".

His performance earned him another Best Actor Academy Award nomination, 17 years after his first. Reviews were strong, and the film is considered one of the best of his later career. In Day, he found a co-star with whom he could build a rapport, such as he had had with Blondell at the start of his career. Day herself was full of praise for Cagney, stating that he was "the most professional actor I've ever known. He was always 'real'. I simply forgot we were making a picture. His eyes would actually fill up when we were working on a tender scene. And you never needed drops to make your eyes shine when Jimmy was on the set."

Cagney's next film was "Mister Roberts", directed by John Ford and slated to star Spencer Tracy. Tracy's involvement ensured that Cagney accepted a supporting role, although in the end, Tracy did not take part. Cagney had worked with Ford before on "What Price Glory?", and they had gotten along fairly well. However, as soon as Ford met Cagney at the airport, the director warned him that they would "tangle asses", which caught Cagney by surprise. He later said, "I would have kicked his brains out. He was so goddamned mean to everybody. He was truly a nasty old man." The next day, Cagney was slightly late on set, incensing Ford. Cagney cut short his imminent tirade, saying "When I started this picture, you said that we would tangle asses before this was over. I'm ready now – are you?" Ford walked away, and they had no more problems, though Cagney never particularly liked Ford.

Cagney's skill at noticing tiny details in other actors' performances became apparent during the shooting of "Mister Roberts". While watching the "Kraft Music Hall" anthology television show some months before, Cagney had noticed Jack Lemmon performing left-handed. The first thing that Cagney asked Lemmon when they met was if he was still using his left hand. Lemmon was shocked; he had done it on a whim, and thought no one else had noticed. He said of his co-star, "his powers of observation must be absolutely incredible, in addition to the fact that he remembered it. I was very flattered."

The film was a success, securing three Oscar nominations, including Best Picture, Best Sound Recording and Best Supporting Actor for Lemmon, who won. While Cagney was not nominated, he had thoroughly enjoyed the production. Filming on Midway Island and in a more minor role meant that he had time to relax and engage in his hobby of painting. He also drew caricatures of the cast and crew.

In 1955, Cagney replaced Spencer Tracy on the Western film "Tribute to a Bad Man" for Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer. He received praise for his performance, and the studio liked his work enough to offer him "These Wilder Years" with Barbara Stanwyck. The two stars got on well; they had both previously worked in vaudeville, and they entertained the cast and crew off-screen by singing and dancing.

In 1956, Cagney undertook one of his very rare television roles, starring in Robert Montgomery's "Soldiers From the War Returning". This was a favor to Montgomery, who needed a strong fall season opener to stop the network from dropping his series. Cagney's appearance ensured that it was a success. The actor made it clear to reporters afterwards that television was not his medium: "I do enough work in movies. This is a high-tension business. I have tremendous admiration for the people who go through this sort of thing every week, but it's not for me."

The following year, Cagney appeared in "Man of a Thousand Faces", in which he played Lon Chaney. He received excellent reviews, with the "New York Journal American" rating it one of his best performances, and the film, made for Universal, was a box office hit. Cagney's skill at mimicry, combined with a physical similarity to Chaney, helped him generate empathy for his character.

Later in 1957, Cagney ventured behind the camera for the first and only time to direct "Short Cut to Hell", a remake of the 1941 Alan Ladd film "This Gun for Hire", which in turn was based on the Graham Greene novel "A Gun for Sale". Cagney had long been told by friends that he would make an excellent director, so when he was approached by his friend, producer A. C. Lyles, he instinctively said yes. He refused all offers of payment, saying he was an actor, not a director. The film was low budget, and shot quickly. As Cagney recalled, "We shot it in twenty days, and that was long enough for me. I find directing a bore, I have no desire to tell other people their business".

In 1959, Cagney played a labor leader in what proved to be his final musical, "Never Steal Anything Small", which featured a comical song and dance duet with Cara Williams, who played his girlfriend.

For Cagney's next film, he traveled to Ireland for "Shake Hands with the Devil", directed by Michael Anderson. Cagney had hoped to spend some time tracing his Irish ancestry, but time constraints and poor weather meant that he was unable to do so. The overriding message of violence inevitably leading to more violence attracted Cagney to the role of an Irish Republican Army commander, and resulted in what some critics would regard as the finest performance of his final years.

Cagney's career began winding down, and he made only one film in 1960, the critically acclaimed "The Gallant Hours", in which he played Admiral William F. "Bull" Halsey. The film, although set during the Guadalcanal Campaign in the Pacific Theater during World War II, was not a war film, but instead focused on the impact of command. Cagney Productions, which shared the production credit with Robert Montgomery's company, made a brief return, though in name only. The film was a success, and "The New York Times"' Bosley Crowther singled its star out for praise: "It is Mr. Cagney's performance, controlled to the last detail, that gives life and strong, heroic stature to the principal figure in the film. There is no braggadocio in it, no straining for bold or sharp effects. It is one of the quietest, most reflective, subtlest jobs that Mr. Cagney has ever done."
Cagney's penultimate film was a comedy. He was hand-picked by Billy Wilder to play a hard-driving Coca-Cola executive in the film "One, Two, Three". Cagney had concerns with the script, remembering back 23 years to "Boy Meets Girl", in which scenes were reshot to try to make them funnier by speeding up the pacing, with the opposite effect. Cagney received assurances from Wilder that the script was balanced. Filming did not go well, though, with one scene requiring 50 takes, something to which Cagney was unaccustomed. In fact, it was one of the worst experiences of his long career. For the first time, Cagney considered walking out of a film. He felt he had worked too many years inside studios, and combined with a visit to Dachau concentration camp during filming, he decided that he had had enough, and retired afterward. One of the few positive aspects was his friendship with Pamela Tiffin, to whom he gave acting guidance, including the secret that he had learned over his career: "You walk in, plant yourself squarely on both feet, look the other fella in the eye, and tell the truth."

Cagney remained in retirement for 20 years, conjuring up images of Jack L. Warner every time he was tempted to return, which soon dispelled the notion. After he had turned down an offer to play Alfred Doolittle in "My Fair Lady", he found it easier to rebuff others, including a part in "The Godfather Part II". He made few public appearances, preferring to spend winters in Los Angeles, and summers either at his Martha's Vineyard farm or at Verney Farms in New York. When in New York, Billie Vernon and he held numerous parties at the Silver Horn restaurant, where they got to know Marge Zimmermann, the proprietress.

Cagney was diagnosed with glaucoma and began taking eye drops, but continued to have vision problems. On Zimmermann's recommendation, he visited a different doctor, who determined that glaucoma had been a misdiagnosis, and that Cagney was actually diabetic. Zimmermann then took it upon herself to look after Cagney, preparing his meals to reduce his blood triglycerides, which had reached alarming levels. Such was her success that, by the time Cagney made a rare public appearance at his American Film Institute Lifetime Achievement award ceremony in 1974, he had lost and his vision had improved. Charlton Heston opened the ceremony, and Frank Sinatra introduced Cagney. So many Hollywood stars attended—said to be more than for any event in history—that one columnist wrote at the time that a bomb in the dining room would have ended the movie industry. In his acceptance speech, Cagney lightly chastised the impressionist Frank Gorshin, saying, "Oh, Frankie, just in passing, I never said 'MMMMmmmm, you dirty rat!' What I actually did say was 'Judy, Judy, Judy!'"—a joking reference to a similar misquotation attributed to Cary Grant.
While at Coldwater Canyon in 1977, Cagney had a minor stroke. After two weeks in the hospital, Zimmermann became his full-time caregiver, traveling with Billie Vernon and him wherever they went. After the stroke, Cagney was no longer able to undertake many of his favorite pastimes, including horseback riding and dancing, and as he became more depressed, he even gave up painting. Encouraged by his wife and Zimmermann, Cagney accepted an offer from the director Miloš Forman to star in a small but pivotal role in the film "Ragtime" (1981).

This film was shot mainly at Shepperton Studios in Surrey, England, and on his arrival at Southampton aboard the "Queen Elizabeth 2", Cagney was mobbed by hundreds of fans. Cunard Line officials, who were responsible for the security at the dock, said they had never seen anything like it, although they had experienced past visits by Marlon Brando and Robert Redford.

Despite the fact that "Ragtime" was his first film in 20 years, Cagney was immediately at ease: Flubbed lines and miscues were committed by his co-stars, often simply through sheer awe. Howard Rollins, who received a Best Supporting Actor Oscar nomination for his performance, said, "I was frightened to meet Mr. Cagney. I asked him how to die in front of the camera. He said 'Just die!' It worked. Who would know more about dying than him?" Cagney also repeated the advice he had given to Pamela Tiffin, Joan Leslie, and Lemmon. As filming progressed, Cagney's sciatica worsened, but he finished the nine-week filming, and reportedly stayed on the set after completing his scenes to help the other actors with their dialogue.

Cagney's frequent co-star, Pat O'Brien, appeared with him on the British chat show "Parkinson" in the early 1980s and they both made a surprise appearance at the Queen Mother's command birthday performance at the London Palladium in 1980. His appearance on stage prompted the Queen Mother to rise to her feet, the only time she did so during the whole show, and she later broke protocol to go backstage to speak with Cagney directly.

Cagney made a rare TV appearance in the lead role of the movie "Terrible Joe Moran" in 1984. This was his last role. Cagney's health was fragile and more strokes had confined him to a wheelchair, but the producers worked his real-life mobility problem into the story. They also decided to dub his impaired speech, using the impersonator Rich Little. The film made use of fight clips from Cagney's boxing movie "Winner Take All" (1932), despite the fact that the TV movie is about an entirely different character.

In 1920, Cagney was a member of the chorus for the show "Pitter Patter", where he met Frances Willard "Billie" Vernon. They married on September 28, 1922, and the marriage lasted until his death in 1986. Frances Cagney died in 1994. In 1941, they adopted a son whom they named James Francis Cagney III, and later a daughter, Cathleen "Casey" Cagney. Cagney was a very private man, and while he was willing to give the press opportunities for photographs, he generally spent his time out of the public eye.

Cagney's son married Jill Lisbeth Inness in 1962. The couple had two children, James IV and Cindy. James Cagney III died from a heart attack on January 27, 1984 in Washington, DC, two years before his father's death. He had become estranged from his father and had not seen or talked to him since 1982.

Cagney's daughter Cathleen married Jack W. Thomas in 1962. She, too, was estranged from her father during the final years of his life. She died on August 11, 2004.

As a young man, Cagney became interested in farming – sparked by a soil conservation lecture he had attended – to the extent that during his first walkout from Warner Bros., he helped to found a farm in Martha's Vineyard. Cagney loved that no concrete roads surrounded the property, only dirt tracks. The house was rather run-down and ramshackle, and Billie was initially reluctant to move in, but soon came to love the place, as well. After being inundated by movie fans, Cagney sent out a rumor that he had hired a gunman for security. The ruse proved so successful that when Spencer Tracy came to visit, his taxi driver refused to drive up to the house, saying, "I hear they shoot!" Tracy had to go the rest of the way on foot.

In 1955, having shot three films, Cagney bought a farm in Stanfordville, Dutchess County, New York, for $100,000. Cagney named it Verney Farm, taking the first syllable from Billie's maiden name and the second from his own surname. He turned it into a working farm, selling some of the dairy cattle and replacing them with beef cattle. He expanded it over the years to . Such was Cagney's enthusiasm for agriculture and farming that his diligence and efforts were rewarded by an honorary degree from Florida's Rollins College. Rather than just "turning up with Ava Gardner on my arm" to accept his honorary degree, Cagney turned the tables upon the college's faculty by writing and submitting a paper on soil conservation.

Cagney, born in 1899 (prior to widespread use of automobiles), loved horses from childhood. As a child, he often sat on the horses of local deliverymen, and rode in horse-drawn streetcars with his mother. As an adult, well after horses were replaced by automobiles as the primary mode of transportation, Cagney raised horses on his farms, specializing in Morgans, a breed of which he was particularly fond.

Cagney was a keen sailor and owned boats harbored on both US coasts, His joy in sailing, however, did not protect him from occasional seasickness—becoming ill, sometimes, on a calm day while weathering rougher, heavier seas at other times. Cagney greatly enjoyed painting, and claimed in his autobiography that he might have been happier, if somewhat poorer, as a painter than a movie star. The renowned painter Sergei Bongart taught Cagney in his later life and owned two of Cagney's works. Cagney often gave away his work, but refused to sell his paintings, considering himself an amateur. He signed and sold only one painting, purchased by Johnny Carson to benefit a charity.

In his autobiography, Cagney said that as a young man, he had no political views, since he was more concerned with where the next meal was coming from. However, the emerging labor movement of the 1920s and 1930s soon forced him to take sides. The first version of the National Labor Relations Act was passed in 1935 and growing tensions between labor and management fueled the movement. Fanzines in the 1930s, however, described his politics as "radical". 

This somewhat exaggerated view was enhanced by his public contractual wranglings with Warner Bros. at the time, his joining of the Screen Actors Guild in 1933, and his involvement in the revolt against the so-called "Merriam tax". The "Merriam tax" was an underhanded method of funneling studio funds to politicians; during the 1934 Californian gubernatorial campaign, the studio executives would 'tax' their actors, automatically taking a day's pay from their biggest-earners, ultimately sending nearly half a million dollars to the gubernatorial campaign of Frank Merriam. Cagney (as well as Jean Harlow) publicly refused to pay and Cagney even threatened that, if the studios took a day's pay for Merriam's campaign, he would give a week's pay to Upton Sinclair, Merriam's opponent in the race.

He supported political activist and labor leader Thomas Mooney's defense fund, but was repelled by the behavior of some of Mooney's supporters at a rally. Around the same time, he gave money for a Spanish Republican Army ambulance during the Spanish Civil War, which he put down to being "a soft touch". This donation enhanced his liberal reputation. He also became involved in a "liberal group...with a leftist slant," along with Ronald Reagan. However, when Reagan and he saw the direction the group was heading, they resigned on the same night.
Cagney was accused of being a communist sympathizer in 1934, and again in 1940. The accusation in 1934 stemmed from a letter police found from a local Communist official that alleged that Cagney would bring other Hollywood stars to meetings. Cagney denied this, and Lincoln Steffens, husband of the letter's writer, backed up this denial, asserting that the accusation stemmed solely from Cagney's donation to striking cotton workers in the San Joaquin Valley. William Cagney claimed this donation was the root of the charges in 1940. Cagney was cleared by U.S. Representative Martin Dies Jr., on the House Un-American Activities Committee.

Cagney became president of the Screen Actors Guild in 1942 for a two-year term. He took a role in the Guild's fight against the Mafia, which had begun to take an active interest in the movie industry. His wife, Billie Vernon, once received a phone call telling her that Cagney was dead. Cagney alleged that, having failed to scare off the Guild and him, they sent a hitman to kill him by dropping a heavy light onto his head. Upon hearing of the rumor of a hit, George Raft made a call, and the hit was supposedly canceled.

During World War II, Cagney raised money for war bonds by taking part in racing exhibitions at the Roosevelt Raceway and selling seats for the premiere of "Yankee Doodle Dandy". He also let the Army practice maneuvers at his Martha's Vineyard farm.

After the war, Cagney's politics started to change. He had worked on Democrat Franklin D. Roosevelt's presidential campaigns, including the 1940 presidential election against Wendell Willkie. However, by the time of the 1948 election, he had become disillusioned with Harry S. Truman, and voted for Thomas E. Dewey, his first non-Democratic vote. 

By 1980, Cagney was contributing financially to the Republican Party, supporting his friend Ronald Reagan's bid for the presidency in the 1980 election. As he got older, he became more and more conservative, referring to himself in his autobiography as "arch-conservative". He regarded his move away from liberal politics as "a totally natural reaction once I began to see undisciplined elements in our country stimulating a breakdown of our system... Those functionless creatures, the hippies ... just didn't appear out of a vacuum."

Cagney died at his Dutchess County farm in Stanfordville, New York, on Easter Sunday 1986, of a heart attack. He was 86 years old. He died 4 days after his brother William’s 81st birthday. A funeral Mass was held at Manhattan's St. Francis de Sales Roman Catholic Church. The eulogy at the funeral was given by his close friend, who was also the President of the United States at the time, Ronald Reagan. His pallbearers included the boxer Floyd Patterson, the dancer Mikhail Baryshnikov (who had hoped to play Cagney on Broadway), actor Ralph Bellamy, and the director Miloš Forman. Governor Mario M. Cuomo and Mayor Edward I. Koch were also in attendance at the service.

Cagney was interred in a crypt in the Garden Mausoleum at Cemetery of the Gate of Heaven in Hawthorne, New York.

James Cagney won the Academy Award in 1943 for his performance as George M. Cohan in "Yankee Doodle Dandy".

For his contributions to the film industry, Cagney was inducted into the Hollywood Walk of Fame in 1960 with a motion pictures star located at 6504 Hollywood Boulevard.

In 1974, Cagney received the American Film Institute's Life Achievement Award. Charlton Heston, in announcing that Cagney was to be honored, called him "...one of the most significant figures of a generation when American film was dominant, Cagney, that most American of actors, somehow communicated eloquently to audiences all over the world ...and to actors as well."

He received the Kennedy Center Honors in 1980, and a Career Achievement Award from the U.S. National Board of Review in 1981. In 1984, Ronald Reagan awarded him the Presidential Medal of Freedom.

In 1999, the U.S. Postal Service issued a 33-cent stamp honoring Cagney.

Cagney was among the most favored actors for the director Stanley Kubrick and the actor Marlon Brando, and was considered by Orson Welles to be "maybe the greatest actor to ever appear in front of a camera." Warner Bros. arranged private screenings of Cagney films for Winston Churchill.

On May 19, 2015, a new musical celebrating Cagney, and dramatizing his relationship with Warner Bros., opened off-Broadway in New York City at the York Theatre. "Cagney, The Musical" has since moved to the Westside Theatre.





</doc>
<doc id="82847" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=82847" title="George C. Scott">
George C. Scott

George Campbell Scott (October 18, 1927 – September 22, 1999) was an American stage and film actor, director, and producer. He was best known for his stage work, as well as his portrayal of General George S. Patton in the film "Patton", as General Buck Turgidson in Stanley Kubrick's "Dr. Strangelove or: How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Love the Bomb", and as Ebenezer Scrooge in Clive Donner's 1984 film "A Christmas Carol".

He was the first actor to refuse the Academy Award for Best Actor (for "Patton" in 1970), having warned the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences months in advance that he would do so on philosophical grounds if he won. Scott believed that every dramatic performance was unique and could not be compared to others.

George Campbell Scott was born October 18, 1927, in Wise, Virginia, the son of Helena Agnes ("née" Slemp; 1904–1935) and George Dewey Scott (1902–1988). His mother died just before his eighth birthday, and he was raised by his father, an executive at Buick. Scott's original ambition was to be a writer like his favorite author, F. Scott Fitzgerald; while attending Redford High School in Detroit, he wrote many short stories, none of which was ever published. As an adult, he tried on many occasions to write a novel, but was never able to complete one to his satisfaction.

Scott joined the United States Marine Corps, serving from 1945 to 1949. He was assigned to 8th and I Barracks in Washington, DC, in which capacity he taught English literature and radio speaking/writing at the Marine Corps Institute. His primary duty, however, was as an honor guard for military funerals at Arlington National Cemetery. He later said his duties at Arlington led to his drinking. After his military service, Scott enrolled in the University of Missouri, where he majored in journalism and then became interested in drama. His first public appearance on stage was as the barrister in a university production of Terence Rattigan's "The Winslow Boy", directed by H. Donovan Rhynsburger. During rehearsals for that show, he made his first stage appearance—in a student production of Noël Coward's "Hands Across the Sea", directed by Jerry V. Tobias. He graduated from the university in 1953 with degrees in English and theater.

Scott first rose to prominence for his work with Joseph Papp's New York Shakespeare Festival. In 1958, he won an Obie Award for his performances in "Children of Darkness" (in which he made the first of many appearances opposite his future wife, actress Colleen Dewhurst), for "As You Like It", and for playing the title character in William Shakespeare's "Richard III" (a performance one critic said was the "angriest" Richard III of all time).

He was on Broadway the following year, winning critical acclaim for his portrayal of the prosecutor in "The Andersonville Trial" by Saul Levitt. This was based on the military trial of the commandant of the infamous Civil War prison camp in Andersonville, Georgia. His performance earned him a mention in "Time". In 1970, Scott directed a highly acclaimed television version of this same play. It starred William Shatner, Richard Basehart, and Jack Cassidy, who was nominated for an Emmy Award for his performance as the defense lawyer in this production.

Scott continued to appear in and sometimes direct Broadway productions throughout the 1960s. The most commercially successful show in which he worked was Neil Simon's "Plaza Suite" (1968). The show was composed of three separate one-act plays all using the same set, with Scott portraying a different lead character in each act; it ran for 1,097 performances.

He made many television appearances, including an episode of NBC's "The Virginian", in the episode "The Brazen Bell", in which he recites Oscar Wilde's poem "The Ballad Of Reading Gaol". That same year, he appeared in NBC's medical drama "The Eleventh Hour", in the episode "I Don't Belong in a White-Painted House". He appeared opposite Laurence Olivier and Julie Harris in Graham Greene's "The Power and the Glory" in a 1961 television production.

In 1963, Scott starred in the hour-long television drama series "East Side/West Side." He portrayed a New York City social worker, along with co-stars Cicely Tyson and Elizabeth Wilson. Scott was a major creative influence on the show, resulting in conflicts with James T. Aubrey, the head of CBS. The Emmy Award-winning program had a series of prominent guest stars, including James Earl Jones. The portrayal of challenging urban issues made attracting advertisers difficult, not helped by the limited distribution. Not all CBS network affiliates broadcast the show, and it was cancelled after one season.

Scott's most famous early role was in the 1964 film "Dr. Strangelove, or How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Love the Bomb", in which he played General "Buck" Turgidson. In later interviews with Stanley Kubrick, Scott was revealed to have initially refused to camp it up on camera. As a compromise, Kubrick had Scott go over the top in rehearsal, assuring Scott that the cameras were off, which was untrue. Kubrick proceeded to use this version in the final cut, which Scott supposedly resented.

In 1965, he was cast, under the direction of John Huston, as Abraham with, among others, co-star Ava Gardner cast as Sarah in the Dino de Laurentiis film: "" which was released by 20th Century Fox in 1966. In 1966, Scott appeared as Jud Barker in the NBC western "The Road West", starring Barry Sullivan, Kathryn Hays, Andrew Prine, and Glenn Corbett. Scott won wide public recognition in the film "Anatomy of a Murder", in which he played a wily prosecutor opposite James Stewart as the defense attorney. Scott was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor.

Scott portrayed George S. Patton in the 1970 film "Patton" and researched extensively for the role, studying films of the general and talking to those who knew him. Scott refused the Oscar nomination for "Patton", just as he had done for his 1962 nomination for ""The Hustler"", but won the award anyway.

In a letter to the Motion Picture Academy, he stated that he did not feel himself to be in competition with other actors. However, regarding this second rejection of the Academy Award, Scott famously said elsewhere, "The whole thing is a goddamn meat parade. I don't want any part of it." Sixteen years later, in 1986, Scott reprised his role in a made-for-television sequel, "The Last Days of Patton". The movie was based on Patton's final weeks after being mortally injured in a car accident, with flashbacks of Patton's life. At the time the sequel was aired, Scott mentioned in a "TV Guide" interview that he told the academy to donate his Oscar to the Patton Museum, but since the instructions were never put in writing, it was never delivered (the Best Picture Oscar for "Patton" was given to the George C. Marshall Foundation Library at the Virginia Military Institute in Lexington, Virginia, the same institution that generations of Pattons attended, by producer Frank McCarthy a few weeks after the awards ceremony, and is on display there). Scott did not turn down the New York Film Critics Award (of which his then wife Colleen Dewhurst said, "George thinks this is the only film award worth having").

He continued to do stage work throughout the rest of his career, receiving Tony Award nominations for his performance as Astrov in a revival of "Uncle Vanya" (1973), his Willy Loman in a revival of "Death of a Salesman" (1975), and his performance as Henry Drummond in a revival of "Inherit the Wind" (1996). In the latter play, he had to miss an unusually large number of performances due to illness, with his role being taken over by National Actors Theatre artistic director Tony Randall. In 1996, he received an honorary Drama Desk Award for a lifetime devotion to theatre.

Scott also starred in well-received productions of Larry Gelbart's "Sly Fox" (1976) (based on Ben Jonson's "Volpone"), which ran 495 performances, and a revival of Noël Coward's "Present Laughter" (1982). He frequently directed on Broadway, as well, including productions of "All God's Chillun Got Wings" (1975) and "Design for Living" (1985), as well as being an actor and director ("Death of a Salesman", "Present Laughter" and "On Borrowed Time").

In 1971, Scott gave two more critically acclaimed performances, as a retired judge who believes himself to be Sherlock Holmes in "They Might Be Giants" and as an alcoholic doctor in the black comedy "The Hospital." Despite his repeated snubbing of the academy, Scott was again nominated for Best Actor for the latter role. Scott excelled on television that year as well, appearing in an adaptation of Arthur Miller's "The Price", an installment of the "Hallmark Hall of Fame" anthology. He was nominated for, and won, an Emmy Award for his role, which he accepted.

Scott also starred in the popular 1980 horror film "The Changeling", with Melvyn Douglas. He received the Canadian Genie Award for Best Foreign Film Actor for his performance. In 1981, Scott appeared alongside Timothy Hutton and rising stars Sean Penn and Tom Cruise in the coming-of-age film "Taps". In 1982, he was cast as Fagin in the CBS made-for-TV adaptation of Charles Dickens' "Oliver Twist". In 1984, he portrayed Ebenezer Scrooge in a television adaptation of "A Christmas Carol". He was nominated for an Emmy Award for the role.

In 1989, Scott starred in the television movie "The Ryan White Story", as Charles Vaughan, the lawyer defending Ryan White from discrimination. In 1990, he voiced Smoke, the villain in the television special "Cartoon All-Stars to the Rescue", and he also voiced the villainous Percival McLeach in Disney's "The Rescuers Down Under" that same year. He was featured in "The Exorcist III" the same year. In 1997, Scott portrayed Juror #3 in the TV-movie "12 Angry Men," for which he would win another Emmy Award. He hosted the TV series "Weapons At War" on A&E TV, but was replaced after one season by Gerald McRaney. "Weapons At War" moved to The History Channel with Scott still credited as host for the first season. Scott was replaced by Robert Conrad after his death in 1999. In 1999, he made his last film, the TV movie "Inherit the Wind," portraying Matthew Harrison Brady (ironically opposite the role he had played on stage) with Jack Lemmon as Henry Drummond, with whom he had also worked in "12 Angry Men".

Scott had a reputation for being moody and mercurial while on the set. "There is no question you get pumped up by the recognition," he once said, "Then a self-loathing sets in when you realize you're enjoying it." A famous anecdote relates that one of his stage costars, Maureen Stapleton, told the director of Neil Simon's "Plaza Suite," "I don't know what to do — I'm scared of him." The director, Mike Nichols, replied, "My dear, everyone is scared of George C. Scott."

Scott was married five times:

He had a daughter, Michelle (b. 1954) with Karen Truesdell.
In 1982, Scott appeared in a campaign commercial for Republican U.S. Senator Lowell P. Weicker of Connecticut. Like Weicker, Scott was, at that time, a resident of Greenwich, Connecticut.

Scott suffered a series of heart attacks in the 1980s. He died on September 22, 1999, aged 71, of a ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysm. He was interred in the Westwood Village Memorial Park Cemetery in Westwood, California in an unmarked grave located to the right of that of Walter Matthau.



</doc>
<doc id="46344" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46344" title="Roberto Benigni">
Roberto Benigni

Roberto Remigio Benigni, (; born 27 October 1952) is an Italian actor, comedian, screenwriter and director. He co-wrote, directed and acted in the 1997 film "Life Is Beautiful", which garnered him the Academy Award for Best Actor and the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film. He also portrayed Inspector Clouseau's son in "Son of the Pink Panther" (1993) and has collaborated with filmmaker Jim Jarmusch in three of his films: "Down by Law" (1986), "Night on Earth" (1991) and "Coffee and Cigarettes" (2003).

Benigni was born in Manciano La Misericordia (a "frazione" of Castiglion Fiorentino), the son of Isolina Papini, a fabric maker, and Luigi Benigni, a bricklayer, carpenter, and farmer. He was raised Catholic and served as an altar boy; he still considers himself a believer. His first experiences as a theatre actor took place in 1971, in Prato. During that autumn he moved to Rome where he took part in some experimental theatre shows, some of which he also directed. In 1975, Benigni had his first theatrical success with "Cioni Mario di Gaspare fu Giulia", written by Giuseppe Bertolucci.

Benigni became famous in Italy in the 1970s for a television series called "Onda Libera", on RAI2, produced by Renzo Arbore, in which he interpreted the satirical piece "The Hymn of the Body Purged" ("L'inno del corpo sciolto", a scatological song about the joys of defecation). A great scandal for the time, the series was suspended due to censorship. His first film was 1977's "Berlinguer, I Love You" ("Berlinguer ti voglio bene"), also by Bertolucci.

His popularity increased with "L'altra domenica" (1976/9), another TV show of Arbore's in which Benigni portrayed a lazy film critic who never watches the films he's asked to review. Bernardo Bertolucci then cast him in a small speechless role as a window upholsterer in the film "La Luna" which had limited American distribution due to its subject matter.

In 1980 he met Cesenate actress Nicoletta Braschi, who was to become his wife and who has starred in most of the films he has directed.

In June 1983 he appeared during a public political demonstration by the Italian Communist Party, with which he was a sympathiser, and on this occasion he lifted and cradled the party's national leader Enrico Berlinguer. It was an unprecedented act, given that until that moment Italian politicians were proverbially serious and formal. Benigni was censored again in the 1980s for calling Pope John Paul II something impolite during an important live TV show ("Wojtylaccio", meaning "Bad Wojtyla" in Italian, but with a friendly meaning in Tuscan dialect).

Benigni's first film as director was "Tu mi turbi" ("You Upset Me") in 1983. This film was also his first collaboration with Braschi.

In 1984, he played in "Non ci resta che piangere" ("Nothing Left to Do but Cry") with comic actor Massimo Troisi. The story was a fable in which the protagonists are suddenly thrown back in time to the 15th century, just a little before 1492. They start looking for Christopher Columbus in order to stop him from discovering the Americas (for very personal reasons), but are not able to reach him.

Beginning in 1986, Benigni starred in three films by American director Jim Jarmusch. In "Down By Law" (1986) (which in Italy had its title spelled "Daunbailò", in Italian phonetics) he played Bob, an innocent foreigner living in the United States, convicted of manslaughter, whose irrepressible good humour and optimism help him to escape and find love. (The film also starred Braschi as his beloved.) In "Night on Earth", (1991) he played a cabbie in Rome, who causes his passenger, a priest, great discomfort and a heart attack by confessing his bizarre sexual experiences. Later, he also starred in the first of Jarmusch's series of short films, "Coffee and Cigarettes" (2003).

In 1990, he was a member of the Jury at the 40th Berlin International Film Festival.

In 1993, he starred in "Son of the Pink Panther", directed by veteran Blake Edwards. Benigni played Peter Sellers' Inspector Clouseau's illegitimate son who is assigned to save the Princess of Lugash. The film bombed in the US, but was a hit in his homeland.

Benigni had a rare serious role in Federico Fellini's last film, "La voce della luna" ("The Voice of the Moon") (1989). In earlier years Benigni had started a long-lasting collaboration with screenwriter Vincenzo Cerami, for a series of films which scored great success in Italy: "Il piccolo diavolo" ("The Little Devil") with Walter Matthau, "Johnny Stecchino" ("Johnny Toothpick"), and "Il mostro" ("The Monster").

Benigni is perhaps best known outside Italy for his 1997 tragicomedy "Life Is Beautiful" ("La vita è bella"), filmed in Arezzo, also written by Cerami. The film is about an Italian Jewish man who tries to protect his son's innocence during his internment at a Nazi concentration camp, by telling him that the Holocaust is an elaborate game and he must adhere very carefully to the rules to win. Benigni's father had spent three years in a concentration camp in Bergen-Belsen, and "La vita è bella" is based in part on his father's experiences. Benigni was also inspired by the story of Holocaust survivor Rubino Romeo Salmonì. Although the story and presentation of the film had been discussed during production with different Jewish groups to limit the offense it might cause, the film was attacked by critics who accused it of presenting the Holocaust without much suffering, and some who considered that "laughing at everything" was not appropriate. More favourable critics praised Benigni's artistic daring and skill to create a sensitive comedy involving the tragedy, a challenge that Charlie Chaplin confessed he would not have done with "The Great Dictator" had he been aware of the horrors of the Holocaust.

In 1998, the film was nominated for seven Academy Awards. At the 1999 ceremony, the film was awarded the Oscar for Best Foreign Language Film (which Benigni accepted as the film's director), Best Original Dramatic Score (the score by Nicola Piovani), and Benigni received the award for Best Actor (the first for a male performer in a non-English-speaking role, and only the third overall acting Oscar for non-English-speaking roles).

Famously, giddy with delight after "Life Is Beautiful" was announced as the Best Foreign Language Film, Benigni climbed over and then stood on the backs of the seats in front of him and applauded the audience before proceeding to the stage. After winning his Best Actor Oscar later in the evening, he said in his acceptance speech, "This is a terrible mistake because I used up all my English!" To close his speech, Benigni quoted the closing lines of Dante's "Divine Comedy", referencing "the love that moves the sun and all the stars." At the following year's ceremony, when he read the nominees for Best Actress (won by Hilary Swank for "Boys Don't Cry"), host Billy Crystal playfully appeared behind him with a large net to restrain Benigni if he got excessive with his antics again. On a 1999 episode of "Saturday Night Live", host Ray Romano played him in a sketch parodying his giddy behavior at the ceremony.

Benigni played one of the main characters in "Asterix and Obelix vs Caesar" as Detritus, a corrupt Roman provincial governor who wants to kill Julius Caesar, thereby seizing control of the Roman Republic.

As a director, his 2002 film "Pinocchio," one of the costliest films in Italian cinema, performed well in Italy, but it bombed in North America, with a 0% critics' score at Rotten Tomatoes. He was also named as the Worst Actor for his role as Pinocchio, in the 23rd Golden Raspberry Awards. The original Italian version was not so poorly greeted and received six nominations at the David di Donatello Awards, winning two, as well as winning one of the two awards it was nominated for at the Italian National Syndicate of Film Journalists.

That same year, he gave a typically energetic and revealing interview to Canadian filmmaker Damian Pettigrew for "" (2002), a cinematic portrait of the maestro that was nominated for Best Documentary at the European Film Awards, Europe's equivalent of the Oscars. The film went on to win the prestigious Rockie Award for Best Arts Documentary at the Banff World Television Festival (2002) and the "Coup de Coeur" at the International Sunnyside of the Doc Marseille (2002).

In 2003, Benigni was honored by the National Italian American Foundation (NIAF), receiving the Foundation's NIAF Special Achievement Award in Entertainment.

His film "La tigre e la neve" ("The Tiger and the Snow," 2005) is a love story set during the initial stage of the Iraq War.

On 15 October 2005, he performed an impromptu strip tease on Italy's most watched evening news program, removing his shirt and draping it over the newscaster's shoulders. Prior to removing his shirt, Benigni had already hijacked the opening credits of the news program, jumping behind the newscaster and announcing: "Berlusconi has resigned!" (Benigni is an outspoken critic of media tycoon and then former Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi.) The previous day, he had led a crowd of thousands in Rome on Friday in protest at the center-right government's decision to cut state arts funding by 35 percent.

On 2 February 2007, he was awarded the degree of Doctor Honoris Causa by the Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Belgium. On 22 April 2008, the degree of Doctor Honoris Causa was conferred on him by the University of Malta, celebrated by a "Settimana Dantesca" including Benigni's first stage appearance at a university and the premiere of his performing with Dante scholar Robert Hollander.

Benigni has reportedly received offers to bring his Dante show to Broadway, all of which he has turned down.

His film from 2012 is "To Rome with Love" with Woody Allen.

Benigni is an improvisatory poet ("poesia estemporanea" is a form of art popularly followed and practiced in Tuscany), appreciated for his explanation and recitations of Dante's "Divina Commedia" from memory.

During 2006 and 2007, Benigni had a lot of success touring Italy with his 90-minute "one man show" "TuttoDante" ("Everything About Dante"). Combining current events and memories of his past narrated with an ironic tone, Benigni then begins a journey of poetry and passion through the world of the Divine Comedy.

"TuttoDante" has been performed in numerous Italian piazzas, arenas, and stadiums for a total of 130 shows, with an estimated audience of about one million spectators. Over 10 million more spectators watched the TV show, "Il V canto dell’Inferno" ("The 5th Song of Hell"), broadcast by Rai Uno on 29 November 2007, with re-runs on Rai International.

Benigni began North American presentations of "TuttoDante" with an announcement that he learned English to bring the gift of Dante's work to English speakers. The English performance incorporates dialectic discussion of language and verse and is a celebration of modernity and the concept of human consciousness as created by language.

Benigni brought "TuttoDante" to the United States, Canada and Argentina in the TuttoDante Tour between 2008-2009 with performances in San Francisco, Boston and Chicago. Benigni was feted in San Francisco at a special reception held by the National Italian American Foundation (NIAF) in his honor on May 24, 2009. Following his U.S. premiere Benigni performed his last presentation on 16 June 2009, in Buenos Aires, Argentina where he was awarded "Honorary Citizenship of the City of Buenos Aires" in a ceremony held at the Legislative Palace in homage to the notable Italian diaspora and culture in Argentina.

Roberto Benigni is also a singer-songwriter. Among his recorded performances are versions of Paolo Conte's songs.

In 1999, a Golden Palm Star on the Palm Springs, California, Walk of Stars was dedicated to him.

In addition to numerous film awards, Benigni has garnered honorary degrees from universities worldwide:

The Europe List, the largest survey on European culture, established that the top three films in European culture are




</doc>
<doc id="84878" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84878" title="Robert Donat">
Robert Donat

Friedrich Robert Donat (18 March 19059 June 1958) was an English film and stage actor. He is best remembered for his roles in Alfred Hitchcock's "The 39 Steps" (1935) and "Goodbye, Mr. Chips" (1939), winning for the latter the Academy Award for Best Actor.

Donat was also a successful stage actor, despite the challenge of chronic asthma from which he suffered.

Donat was born in Withington, Manchester, the fourth and youngest son of Ernst Emil Donat, a civil engineer of German origin from Prussian Poland, and his wife Rose Alice Green. He was of English, Polish, German and French descent and was educated at Manchester's Central High School for Boys. He took elocution lessons with James Bernard.

Donat made his first stage appearance in 1921, at the age of 16, with Henry Baynton's company at the Prince of Wales Theatre, Birmingham, playing Lucius in "Julius Caesar". His real break came in 1924 when he joined the company of Shakespearean actor Sir Frank Benson, where he stayed for four years. Donat married Ella Annesley Voysey (1903–1994) in 1929; the couple had three children together but divorced in 1946.

"The British cinema's one undisputed romantic leading man in the 1930s was Robert Donat", wrote Jeffrey Richards in his book "The Age of the Dream Palace". "The image he projected was that of the romantic idealist, often with a dash of the gentleman adventurer."

Initially, around 1930 and 1931, he was known as "screen test" Donat in the industry because of his many unsuccessful auditions for film producers. MGM's producer Irving Thalberg spotted him on the London stage in "Precious Bane", and Donat was offered a part in the American studio's "Smilin' Through" (1932). He rejected this offer. Instead, Donat made his film debut in a quota quickie "Men of Tomorrow" (1932) for Alexander Korda's London Films. An abysmal screen test for Korda had ended with Donat's laughter. Reputedly, Korda in response exclaimed: "That's the most natural laugh I have ever heard in my life. What acting! Put him under contract immediately." Donat's first great screen success soon followed in his fourth film. This was as Thomas Culpeper in "The Private Life of Henry VIII" (1933) for the same producer.

Korda loaned him to Edward Small for the only film Donat made in Hollywood, "The Count of Monte Cristo" (1934). He did not care for the film colony and, despite being offered the lead role in "Captain Blood" (1935), returned to Britain to begin work on Alfred Hitchcock's "The 39 Steps" (1935) opposite Madeleine Carroll. His performance was well-received: "Mr Donat, who has never been very well served in the cinema until now, suddenly blossoms out into a romantic comedian of no mean order", wrote the film critic C. A. Lejeune in "The Observer" at the time of the film's release. Lejeune observed that he possessed "an easy confident humour that has always been regarded as the perquisite of the American male star. For the first time on our screen we have the British equivalent of a Clark Gable or a Ronald Colman, playing in a purely national idiom. Mr Donat, himself, I fancy, is hardly conscious of it, which is all to the good." Hitchcock wanted Donat for the role of the Detective in "Sabotage" (1936), but this time Korda refused to release him.

In 1936 Donat took on the management of the Queen's Theatre in Shaftesbury Avenue where he produced "Red Night" by J. L. Hodson. He made two further films under his contract with Korda, "The Ghost Goes West" (1935), and "Knight Without Armour" (1937). Korda became committed to the latter project because of Donat's indecision. Madeleine Carroll had read the James Hilton novel while shooting "The 39 Steps", and had persuaded Donat that it could be a good second film for them to star in together. Donat acquired the rights and passed them on to Korda, although by now Carroll was unavailable. His eventual co-star, Marlene Dietrich, was the source of much attention when she arrived in Britain, in which Donat was involved, and this was enough for him to suffer a nervous collapse a few days into the shooting schedule. Donat entered a nursing home. The production delay caused by Donat's asthma led to talk of replacing him. Dietrich, contracted by Korda for $450,000, threatened to leave the project if this happened, and production was halted for two months, until Donat was able to return to work.

In 1938, Donat signed a contract with MGM British for £150,000 with a commitment to making 6 films. In "The Citadel" (1938), he played Andrew Manson, a newly qualified Scottish doctor, a role for which he received his first Best Actor Oscar nomination.
Donat is best remembered for his role as the school master in "Goodbye, Mr. Chips" (1939). Australian film critic Brian McFarlane writes: "Class-ridden and sentimental perhaps, it remains extraordinarily touching in his Oscar-winning performance, and it ushers in the Donat of the postwar years." His rivals for the Best Actor Award were Clark Gable for "Gone with the Wind", Laurence Olivier for "Wuthering Heights", James Stewart for "Mr. Smith Goes to Washington" and Mickey Rooney for "Babes in Arms".

He was a major theatre star. His stage career included performances in Shaw's "The Devil's Disciple" (1938) and Captain Shotover in a new staging of "Heartbreak House" (1942). With "The Cure for Love" (1945) by Walter Greenwood, one of the stage productions he directed, he began his professional association with Renée Asherson, later his second wife. This continued with a production of "Much Ado About Nothing" (1946) with the couple playing Benedict and Beatrice.

Donat lobbied hard for two film roles: he was cast in neither. He wanted to play the Chorus in Olivier's "Henry V", but the role went to Leslie Banks, and he longed desperately to be cast against type as Bill Sikes in David Lean's "Oliver Twist" (1948), but Lean thought him wrong for the part and cast Robert Newton instead. The MGM British contract ended with litigation, and he made only two more films for the company, "The Adventures of Tartu" (1943), with Valerie Hobson and "Perfect Strangers" (1945) with Deborah Kerr.

Donat suffered from chronic asthma, which affected his career and limited him to appearing in only twenty films. Donat and Asherson reprised their stage roles in the film version of "The Cure for Love" (1949). His only film as director, its production was affected by his ill health. The film's soundtrack had to be re-recorded after shooting was completed because Donat's asthma had severely affected his voice. Modestly received by a reviewer in the "Monthly Film Bulletin", and described as "pedestrian" by Philip French in 2009, it was a hit in the North. In this film, Donat used his natural Mancunian accent, which his early elocution lessons had attempted to completely suppress. Donat married Asherson, his second wife, in 1953. They later separated, but might have reconciled.

He was cast as Thomas Becket in T.S. Eliot's "Murder in the Cathedral" in Robert Helpmann's production at the Old Vic Theatre in 1952, but although his return to stage was well received, his illness forced him to withdraw during the run. The same reason also caused him to drop out of "Hobson's Choice" (1954). Scheduled to play Willy Mossop, he was replaced by John Mills. Author David Shipman speculates that Donat's asthma may have been psychosomatic: "His tragedy was that the promise of his early years was never fulfilled and that he was haunted by agonies of doubt and disappointment (which probably were the cause of his chronic asthma)." David Thomson also suggested this explanation, and Donat himself thought that his illness had a 90% basis in his psychology. In a 1980 interview with Barry Norman, his first wife Ella Annesley Voysey (by then known as Ella Hall), said that Donat's asthma was a psychosomatic response to the birth of their daughter. According to her: "Robert was full of fear." "Lease of Life" (1954), made by Ealing Studios, was his penultimate film in which Donat plays a Vicar who discovers that he has a terminal illness.

Donat's final role was the mandarin Yang Cheng in "The Inn of the Sixth Happiness" (1958). His last spoken words in this film, an emotional soliloquy in which he confesses his conversion reducing Ingrid Bergman as the missionary to tears, were the prophetic, "We shall not see each other again, I think. Farewell." Several months after his death, Donat was nominated for his first Golden Globe and received a National Board of Review Special Citation for his performance.

He died on 9 June 1958 aged 53 in London. His biographer Kenneth Barrow writes on the cause of his death: "Perhaps the asthma had weakened him but, in fact, it was discovered he had a brain tumour the size of a duck egg and cerebral thrombosis was certified as the primary cause of death."

Donat has a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame for motion pictures at 6420 Hollywood Blvd. A blue plaque commemorates Donat at 8 Meadway in Hampstead Garden Suburb. His place of birth at 42 Everett Road in Withington is also commemorated by a similar plaque. The architectural photographer, John Donat (1933–2004), was his son and the actors Peter Donat and Richard Donat are his nephews.



</doc>
<doc id="634431" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=634431" title="Forest Whitaker">
Forest Whitaker

Forest Steven Whitaker III (born July 15, 1961) is an American actor, producer, and director.

Whitaker has earned a reputation for intensive character study work for films such as "Bird", "The Crying Game", "Platoon", "", "The Butler", "Arrival" and "" as Saw Gerrera.

For his performance as Ugandan dictator Idi Amin in the 2006 film "The Last King of Scotland", Whitaker won the Academy Award, British Academy Film Award, Golden Globe Award, National Board of Review Award, Screen Actors Guild Award, and various critics groups awards.

Whitaker was born in Longview, Texas on July 15, 1961, the son of Laura Francis ("née" Smith), a special education teacher who put herself through college and earned two master's degrees while raising her children, and Forest Steven Jr., an insurance salesman. His mother had Akan ancestry, while his father was of Igbo descent. When Whitaker was four, his family moved to Carson, California. Whitaker has two younger brothers, Kenn (an actor) and Damon, and an older sister, Deborah. His first role as an actor was the lead in Dylan Thomas' play "Under Milk Wood".

Whitaker attended Palisades Charter High School and played on the football team and sang in the choir, graduating in 1979. Whitaker entered California State Polytechnic University, Pomona on a football scholarship, but a back injury made him change his major to music (singing). He toured England with the Cal Poly Chamber Singers in 1980. While still at Cal Poly, he briefly changed his major to drama. He was accepted to the Music Conservatory at the University of Southern California to study opera as a tenor, and subsequently was accepted into the University's Drama Conservatory. He graduated from USC with a Bachelor of Fine Arts degree in Acting in 1982. He also earned a scholarship to the Berkeley, California branch of the Drama Studio London. Whitaker was pursuing a degree in ""The Core of Conflict: Studies in Peace and Reconciliation"" at New York University's Gallatin School of Individualized Study in 2004.

Whitaker has a long history of working with well-regarded film directors and actors. In his first onscreen performance of note, he had a supporting role playing a high school football player in the 1982 film version of Cameron Crowe's coming-of-age teen-retrospective "Fast Times at Ridgemont High". In 1986, he appeared in Martin Scorsese's "The Color of Money" and Oliver Stone's "Platoon". The following year, he co-starred in the comedy "Good Morning, Vietnam". In 1988, Whitaker appeared in the film "Bloodsport" and had his first lead role starring as musician Charlie "Bird" Parker in Clint Eastwood's "Bird". To prepare himself for the part, he sequestered himself in a loft with only a bed, couch, and saxophone, having also conducted extensive research and taken alto sax lessons. His performance, which has been called "transcendent", earned him the Best Actor award at the 1988 Cannes Film Festival and a Golden Globe nomination.

Whitaker continued to work with a number of well-known directors throughout the 1990s. He starred in the 1990 film "Downtown" and was cast in the pivotal role of Jody, a captive British soldier in the 1992 film "The Crying Game", for which he used an English accent. Todd McCarthy of "Variety" described Whitaker's performance as "big-hearted", "hugely emotional", and "simply terrific". In 1994, he was a member of the cast that won the first ever National Board of Review Award for Best Acting by an Ensemble for Robert Altman's film, "Prêt-à-Porter". He gave a "characteristically emotional performance" in Wayne Wang and Paul Auster's 1995 film, "Smoke". In 1996, he played a role of a good-natured man in "Phenomenon", alongside John Travolta and Robert Duvall, which earned him a Blockbuster Entertainment Award for Favorite Supporting Actor – Drama.

Whitaker played a serene, pigeon-raising, bushido-following, mob hit man in "", a 1999 film written and directed by Jim Jarmusch. Many consider this to have been a "definitive role" for Whitaker. In a manner similar to his preparation for "Bird", he again immersed himself in his character's world—he studied Eastern philosophy and meditated for long hours "to hone his inner spiritual hitman." Jarmusch has told interviewers that he developed the title character with Whitaker in mind; "The New York Times" review of the film observed that "[I]t's hard to think of another actor who could play a cold-blooded killer with such warmth and humanity."

Whitaker next appeared in what has been called one of the worst films ever made, the 2000 production of "Battlefield Earth", based on the novel of the same name by L. Ron Hubbard. The film was widely criticized as a notorious commercial and critical disaster. However, Whitaker's performance was lauded by the film's director, Roger Christian, who commented that, "Everybody's going to be very surprised" by Whitaker, who "found this huge voice and laugh." "Battlefield Earth" won seven Razzie Awards; Whitaker was nominated for Worst Supporting Actor, but lost to his co-star, Barry Pepper. Whitaker later expressed his regret for participating in the film.
In 2001, Whitaker had a small, uncredited role in the Wong Kar-wai-directed "The Follow", one of five short films produced by BMW that year to promote its cars. He co-starred in Joel Schumacher's 2002 thriller, "Phone Booth", with Kiefer Sutherland and Colin Farrell. That year, he also co-starred with Jodie Foster in "Panic Room". His performance as the film's "bad guy" was described as "a subtle chemistry of aggression and empathy."

Whitaker's 2006 portrayal of Idi Amin in the film "The Last King of Scotland" earned him positive reviews by critics as well as multiple awards and honors. To portray the dictator, Whitaker gained 50 pounds, learned to play the accordion, and immersed himself in research. He read books about Amin, watched news and documentary footage featuring Amin, and spent time in Uganda meeting with Amin's friends, relatives, generals, and victims; he also learned Swahili and mastered Amin's East African accent. His performance earned him the Academy Award for Best Actor, making him the fourth African-American actor in history to do so, joining the ranks of Sidney Poitier, Denzel Washington, and Jamie Foxx. For that same role, he was also recognized with the British Academy Film Award, Golden Globe Award, National Board of Review Award, Screen Actors Guild Award, and accolades from the Broadcast Film Critics Association, London Film Critics’ Circle Award, Los Angeles Film Critics Association, National Society of Film Critics, and New York Film Critics Circle among others.

In 2007, Whitaker played Dr. James Farmer Sr. in "The Great Debaters", for which he received an Image Award nomination for Outstanding Supporting Actor. In 2008, Whitaker appeared in three films, first as a business man known only as Happiness, who likes butterflies, in the film "The Air I Breathe". He also portrayed a rogue police captain in "Street Kings", and a heroic tourist in "Vantage Point".

In 2013, after a small career slump where he starred in a few straight-to-video films, Whitaker has enjoyed a career resurgence, having played the lead role in "Lee Daniels' The Butler", which has become one of his greatest critical and commercial successes to date. Whitaker also starred in the film "Black Nativity" and co-starred in 2013's "The Last Stand", playing an FBI agent chasing an escaped drug cartel leader.

Whitaker played Saw Gerrera in the 2016 film "Rogue One: A Star Wars Story".

After completing several films in the early 1980s, Whitaker gained additional roles in multiple television shows. On the series, "Diff'rent Strokes", he played a bully in the 1985 episode "Bully for Arnold". That same year, Whitaker also played the part of a comic book salesman in the "Amazing Stories" episode "Gather Ye Acorns". He appeared in the first and second parts of "North and South" in 1985 and 1986. Throughout the 1990s, Whitaker mainly had roles in television films which aired on HBO, including "Criminal Justice", "The Enemy Within", and "Witness Protection".

From 2002 to 2003, Whitaker was the host and narrator of 44 new episodes of the Rod Serling classic, "The Twilight Zone", which lasted one season on UPN. After working in several film roles, he returned to television in 2006 when he joined the cast of FX's police serial "The Shield", as Lieutenant Jon Kavanaugh, who was determined to prove that the lead character, Vic Mackey, is a dirty cop. As opposed to his previous character work, Whitaker stated that he merely had to draw on his childhood years growing up in South Central Los Angeles for the role. He received rave reviews for his performance—"Variety" called it a "crackling-good guest stint"—and he reprised the role in the show's 2007 season.

In the fall of 2006, Whitaker started a multi-episode story arc on "ER" as Curtis Ames, a man who comes into the ER with a cough, but quickly faces the long-term consequences of a paralyzing stroke; he sues, then takes out his anger on Dr. Luka Kovač, who he blames for the strokes. Whitaker received a Primetime Emmy Award nomination for his performance in the series. Also in 2006, Whitaker appeared in T.I.'s music video "Live in the Sky" alongside Jamie Foxx.

Whitaker was cast in the "Criminal Minds" spin-off, "", that was subsequently cancelled by CBS on May 17, 2011.

In December 2016, it was announced that Whitaker would reprise his role as Saw Gerrera from "Rogue One" for the "Star Wars Rebels" animated series.

Whitaker made his Broadway debut in 2016 in a revival of Eugene O'Neill's play "Hughie" at the Booth Theatre, directed by Michael Grandage.

Whitaker branched out into producing and directing in the 1990s. He co-produced and co-starred in "A Rage in Harlem" in 1991. He made his directorial debut with a grim film about inner-city gun violence, "Strapped", for HBO in 1993. In 1995, he directed his first theatrical feature, "Waiting to Exhale", which was based on the Terry McMillan novel of the same name. Roger Ebert observed that the tone of the film resembled Whitaker's own acting style: "measured, serene, confident." Whitaker also directed co-star Whitney Houston's music video of the movie's theme song, "Exhale (Shoop Shoop)".

Whitaker continued his directing career with the 1998 romantic comedy, "Hope Floats", starring Sandra Bullock and Harry Connick, Jr. He directed Katie Holmes in the romantic comedy, "First Daughter" in 2004 while also serving as executive producer; he had previously co-starred with Holmes in "Phone Booth" in 2002. He had previously gained experience as the executive producer of several made-for-television movies, most notably the 2002 Emmy-award-winning "Door to Door", starring William H. Macy. 
He produced these projects through his production company, Spirit Dance Entertainment, which he shut down in 2005 to concentrate on his acting career.

For Significant Productions Whitaker and his partner Nina Yang Bongiovi produced the film "Fruitvale Station", which won the Grand Jury Prize and the Audience Award for U.S. dramatic film at the 2013 Sundance Film Festival, as well as "Repentance" (2014), "Dope" (2015) and the upcoming "Sorry to Bother You". Significant also produced a documentary shot in the hospice at Angola prison in Louisiana, 'Serving Life'(2011) for Oprah Winfrey as the first commission for OWN and Oprah's Doc Club.

Whitaker plays an active role as co-chair of JuntoBox Films since his initial involvement as co-chair with the collaborative film studio starting in March 2012. JuntoBox was developed as a social-media platform for filmmakers and fans to share ideas to create films and then collaborate to make them. Since Whitaker joined as co-chair, five projects have been greenlit for production.

In addition to the numerous awards Whitaker won for his performance in "The Last King of Scotland", he has also received several other honors. In September 2006, the 10th Annual Hollywood Film Festival presented him with its "Hollywood Actor of the Year Award," calling him "one of Hollywood's most accomplished actors." He was honored at the Santa Barbara International Film Festival 2007, where he received the American Riviera Award.

Previously, in 2005, the Deauville (France) Festival of American Film paid tribute to him. On April 16, 2007, Whitaker was the recipient of the 2,335th star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame for his contributions to the motion pictures industry at 6801 Hollywood Boulevard. He received the honorary degree of Doctor of Humane Letters from Xavier University of Louisiana in 2009 at the 82nd Commencement Ceremony. He received the honorary degree of Doctor of Humane Letters from California State University, Dominguez Hills on May 16, 2015.

Whitaker, who is a vegetarian, recorded a public service announcement with his daughter, True, promoting vegetarianism on behalf of People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA). He is also a supporter and public advocate for Hope North, a boarding school and vocational training center in northern Uganda for escaped child soldiers, orphans, and other young victims of the country's civil war.
Whitaker founded the Whitaker Peace & Development Initiative (WPDI), a non-governmental organization in 2012. WPDI implements peace-building programs in conflict affected communities in the different regions of the world, including Africa, Latin America and the United States.

In politics, Whitaker supported and spoke on behalf of Senator Barack Obama in his 2008 presidential campaign. On April 6, 2009, he was given a chieftaincy title in Imo State, Nigeria. Whitaker, who was named a chief among the Igbo community of Nkwerre, was given the title "Nwannedinamba" of Nkwerre, which means "A Brother in a Foreign Land".

Whitaker was inducted as a UNESCO Goodwill Ambassador for Peace and Reconciliation, in a ceremony at UNESCO headquarters on June 21, 2011. As Goodwill Ambassador, Whitaker works with UNESCO to support and develop initiatives that empower youths and keep them from entering or remaining in cycles of violence. At the induction ceremony, U.S. Ambassador to UNESCO David Killion described Whitaker as a "perfect choice as a Goodwill Ambassador... he has exemplified compassion in every area of his life, with humility and grace. He does this because it's the right thing to do."

In 2010, Whitaker received the Artist Citizen of the World Award (France).

Whitaker co-founded the International Institute for Peace (IIP) at Rutgers University in Newark, New Jersey. Launched during the international Newark Peace Education Summit, IIP's mission is to develop programs and strategic partnerships to address issues such as increasing citizen security through community-building; the role of women and spiritual and religious leaders in peacebuilding; the impact of climate change; and the reduction of poverty. IIP operates under the auspices of UNESCO.

In 1996, Whitaker married actress Keisha Nash, whom he met on the set of "Blown Away". They have four children: two daughters together (Sonnet and True), and his son (Ocean) and her daughter (Autumn) from their previous relationships.

Whitaker studies yoga and has a black belt in kenpō. He also trains in arnis under Dan Inosanto.

Whitaker's left eye ptosis has been called "intriguing" by some critics and gives him "a lazy, contemplative look". Whitaker has explained that the condition is hereditary and that he has considered having surgery to correct it, not for cosmetic reasons but because it affects his vision.



</doc>
<doc id="113746" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=113746" title="Sean Penn">
Sean Penn

Sean Justin Penn (born August 17, 1960) is an American actor, filmmaker, and political activist. He has won two Academy Awards, for his roles in the mystery drama "Mystic River" (2003) and the biopic "Milk" (2008).

Penn began his acting career in television with a brief appearance in episode 112 of "Little House on the Prairie" (December 4, 1974), directed by his father Leo Penn. Following his film debut in the drama "Taps" (1981) and a diverse range of film roles in the 1980s, including "Fast Times at Ridgemont High" (1982), Penn garnered critical attention for his roles in the crime dramas "At Close Range" (1986), "State of Grace" (1990), and "Carlito's Way" (1993). He became known as a prominent leading actor with the drama "Dead Man Walking" (1995), for which he earned his first Academy Award nomination and the Best Actor Award at the Berlin Film Festival. Penn received another two Oscar nominations for Woody Allen's comedy-drama "Sweet and Lowdown" (1999) and the drama "I Am Sam" (2001), before winning his first Academy Award for Best Actor in 2003 for "Mystic River" and a second one in 2008 for "Milk". He has also won a Best Actor Award of the Cannes Film Festival for the Nick Cassavetes-directed "She's So Lovely" (1997), and two Best Actor Awards at the Venice Film Festival for the indie film "Hurlyburly" (1998) and the drama "21 Grams" (2003).

Penn made his feature film directorial debut with "The Indian Runner" (1991), followed by the drama film "The Crossing Guard" (1995) and the mystery film "The Pledge" (2001). Penn directed one of the 11 segments of "11'09"01 September 11" (2002), a compilation film made in response to the September 11 attacks. His fourth feature film, the biographical drama survival movie "Into the Wild" (2007), garnered critical acclaim and two Academy Award nominations.

In addition to his film work, Penn is known for his political and social activism, including his criticism of the George W. Bush administration, his contact with the Presidents of Cuba and Venezuela, and his humanitarian work in the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina (2005) and the 2010 Haiti earthquake. In January 2016, Penn published an interview (conducted in October 2015) with Mexican drug lord Joaquín "El Chapo" Guzmán in "Rolling Stone". Mexican authorities dismissed the level of importance given by American media to Penn in regard to Guzman's eventual recapture, instead placing importance on actress Kate del Castillo's continued communications with Guzman.

Penn was born in Los Angeles County, California, to actor and director Leo Penn, and actress Eileen Ryan ("née" Annucci). His older brother is musician Michael Penn. His younger brother, actor Chris Penn, died in 2006. His paternal grandparents were Ashkenazi Jewish emigrants from Lithuania and Russia, while his mother is a Catholic of Irish and Italian descent. Penn was raised in a secular home and attended Santa Monica High School. He began making short films with some of his childhood friends, including actors Emilio Estevez and Charlie Sheen, who lived near his home.

Penn appeared in a 1974 episode of the "Little House on the Prairie" television series as an extra when his father, Leo, directed some of the episodes. Penn launched his film career with the action-drama "Taps" (1981), where he played a military high school cadet. A year later, he appeared in the hit comedy "Fast Times at Ridgemont High" (1982), in the role of surfer-stoner Jeff Spicoli; his character helped popularize the word "dude" in popular culture. Next, Penn appeared as Mick O'Brien, a troubled youth, in the drama "Bad Boys" (1983). The role earned Penn favorable reviews and jump-started his career as a serious actor.
Penn played Andrew Daulton Lee in the film "The Falcon and the Snowman" (1985), which closely followed an actual criminal case. Lee was a former drug dealer by trade, convicted of espionage for the Soviet Union and originally sentenced to life in prison, but was paroled in 1998. Penn later hired Lee as his personal assistant, partly because he wanted to reward Lee for allowing him to play Lee in the film; Penn was also a firm believer in rehabilitation and thought Lee should be successfully reintegrated into society, since he was a free man again.

Penn starred in the drama "At Close Range" (1986) which received critical acclaim. He stopped acting for a few years in the early 1990s, having been dissatisfied with the industry, and focused on making his directing debut.

The Academy Awards first recognized his work in nominating him for playing a racist murderer on death row in the drama film "Dead Man Walking" (1995). He was nominated again for his comedic performance as an egotistical jazz guitarist in the film "Sweet and Lowdown" (1999). He received his third nomination after portraying a mentally handicapped father in "I am Sam" (2001). Penn finally won for his role in the Boston crime-drama "Mystic River" (2003). In 2004, Penn played Samuel Bicke, a character based on Samuel Byck, who in 1974 attempted and failed to assassinate President Richard Nixon, in "The Assassination of Richard Nixon" (2004). The same year, he was invited to join the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences. Next, Penn portrayed governor Willie Stark (based on Huey Long) in an adaptation of Robert Penn Warren's classic 1946 American novel "All the King's Men" (2006). The film was a critical and commercial failure, named by a 2010 "Forbes" article as the biggest flop in the last five years.

In November 2008, Penn earned positive reviews for his portrayal of real-life gay-rights icon and politician Harvey Milk in the biopic "Milk" (2008), and was nominated for best actor for the 2008 Independent Spirit Awards. The film also earned Penn his fifth nomination and second win for the Academy Award for Best Actor. Penn starred as Joseph C. Wilson in "Fair Game" (2010), a film adaptation of Valerie Plame's . He co-starred in the drama "The Tree of Life" (2011), which won the Palme d'Or at the 2011 Cannes Film Festival. In 2015, Penn starred in "The Gunman", a French-American action thriller based on the novel "The Prone Gunman", by Jean-Patrick Manchette. Jasmine Trinca, Idris Elba, Ray Winstone, Mark Rylance and fellow Oscar-winner Javier Bardem appear in supporting roles. Penn plays Jim Terrier, a sniper on a mercenary assassination team who kills the minister of mines of the Congo.

Penn made his directorial debut with "The Indian Runner" (1991), a crime drama film based on Bruce Springsteen's song "Highway Patrolman", from the album "Nebraska" (1982). He also directed music videos, such as Shania Twain's "Dance with the One That Brought You" (1993), Lyle Lovett's "North Dakota" (1993), and Peter Gabriel's "The Barry Williams Show" (2002). He has since directed three more films, all well received by critics: the indie thriller "The Crossing Guard" (1995), the mystery film "The Pledge" (2001), and the biographical drama survival film "Into the Wild" (2007). Penn's fifth directorial feature "The Last Face" (2016) premiered at the 2016 Cannes Film Festival.

Penn was engaged to actress Elizabeth McGovern, his co-star in "Racing with the Moon" (1984).

He met pop singer Madonna in February 1985, and they married that August on her birthday. The two starred in the panned and much-derided "Shanghai Surprise" (1986), directed by Jim Goddard, and Madonna dedicated her third studio album "True Blue" (1986) to Penn, referring to him in the liner notes as "the coolest guy in the universe". The relationship was marred by violent outbursts against the press, including one incident when Penn was arrested for assaulting a photographer on a film set; Penn was sentenced to 60 days in jail in mid-1987, of which he served 33 days. Madonna filed for divorce in December 1987 but later withdrew the papers, only to file them again in January 1989. Madonna reportedly filed an assault complaint that she was beaten in her Malibu home by her estranged husband, but in January 1989, the Associated Press reported that she had "dropped assault charges." Penn was alleged to have struck Madonna on multiple occasions, but in 2015 Madonna stated the allegations were "completely outrageous, malicious, reckless, and false”.

At the end of his first marriage, Penn moved in with actress Robin Wright, and their first child, a daughter named Dylan Frances, was born April 13, 1991. Their second child, son Hopper Jack, was born August 6, 1993.

Penn and Wright separated in 1995, during which time he developed a relationship with Jewel, after he spotted her performing on "Late Night with Conan O'Brien". He invited her to compose a song for his film "The Crossing Guard" (1995) and followed her on tour.

Penn and Wright reconciled, married on April 27, 1996, and lived in Ross, California. The couple filed for divorce in December 2007 but reconciled several months later, requesting a court dismissal of their divorce case.

In April 2009, Penn filed for legal separation, only to withdraw the case once again when the couple reconciled in May. On August 12, 2009, Wright Penn filed for divorce again. The couple's divorce was finalized on July 22, 2010; the couple reached a private agreement on child and spousal support, division of assets, and custody of Hopper, who was almost 17 at the time.

In December 2013, Penn began dating actress Charlize Theron. The two announced their engagement in December 2014. Theron ended their relationship in June 2015.

Penn has been outspoken in supporting numerous political and social causes. On December 13–16, 2002, he visited Iraq to protest the Bush Administration's apparent plans for a military strike on Iraq. On June 10, 2005, Penn made a visit to Iran. Acting as a journalist on an assignment for the "San Francisco Chronicle", he attended a Friday prayer at Tehran University.
On January 7, 2006, Penn was a special guest at the Progressive Democrats of America, where he was joined by author and media critic Norman Solomon, Democratic congressional candidate Charles Brown, and activist Cindy Sheehan. The "Out of Iraq Forum", which took place in Sacramento, California, was organized to promote the anti-war movement calling for an end to the War in Iraq.

On December 18, 2006, Penn received the Christopher Reeve First Amendment Award from the Creative Coalition for his commitment to free speech. In August 2008, Penn made an appearance at one of Ralph Nader's "Open the Debates" Super Rallies. He protested the political exclusion of Nader and other third parties. In October 2008, Penn traveled to Cuba, where he met with and interviewed President Raúl Castro.
In February 2012, he stood beside Hugo Chávez while Venezuela supported the Syrian government during the 2011–2012 Syrian uprising.

On October 18, 2002, Penn placed a US$56,000 advertisement in the "Washington Post" asking then President George W. Bush to end a cycle of violence. It was written as an open letter and referred to the planned attack on Iraq and the War on Terror.

In the letter, Penn also criticized the Bush administration for its "deconstruction of civil liberties" and its "simplistic and inflammatory view of good and evil." Penn visited Iraq briefly in December 2002. "Sean is one of the few," remarked his ex-wife Madonna. "Good for him. Most celebrities are keeping their heads down. Nobody wants to be unpopular. But then Americans, by and large, are pretty ignorant of what's going on in the world."
The "Post" advertisement was cited as a primary reason for the development of his relationship with Venezuelan president Hugo Chávez. In one of his televised speeches, Chávez used and read aloud an open letter Penn wrote to Bush. The letter condemned the Iraq War, called for Bush to be impeached, and also called Bush, Vice President Dick Cheney, and Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice "villainously and criminally obscene people."

On April 19, 2007, Penn appeared on "The Colbert Report" and had a "Meta-Free-Phor-All" versus Stephen Colbert that was judged by Robert Pinsky. This stemmed from some of Penn's criticisms of Bush. His exact quote was "We cower as you point your fingers telling us to support our troops. You and the smarmy pundits in your pocket– those who bathe in the moisture of your soiled and blood-soaked underwear– can take that noise and shove it." He won the contest with 10,000,000 points to Colbert's 1.
On December 7, 2007, Penn said he supported Ohio Congressman Dennis J. Kucinich for U.S. President in 2008, and criticized Bush's handling of the Iraq war. Penn questioned whether Bush's twin daughters supported the war in Iraq.

In September 2005, Penn traveled to New Orleans, Louisiana, to aid Hurricane Katrina victims. He was physically involved in rescuing people, although there was criticism that his involvement was a PR stunt as he hired a photographer to come along with his entourage. Penn denied such accusations in an article he wrote for "The Huffington Post". Director Spike Lee interviewed Penn for Lee's documentary about Hurricane Katrina, "" (2006).

On February 22, 2009, Penn received the Academy Award for Best Actor for the film "Milk". In his acceptance speech, he said: "I think that it is a good time for those who voted for the ban against gay marriage to sit and reflect and anticipate their great shame and the shame in their grandchildren's eyes if they continue that way of support. We've got to have equal rights for everyone!"

After the 2010 Haiti earthquake, Penn founded the J/P Haitian Relief Organization, which has been running a 55,000 person tent camp.
Due to his visibility as an on-the-ground advocate for rescue and aid efforts in the aftermath, Penn was designated by president Michel Martelly as Ambassador-at-Large for Haiti, the first time that a non-Haitian citizen has been designated as such in the country's history. Penn received the designation on January 31, 2012.

Penn gained significant attention in the Pakistan media when he visited Karachi and Badin in 2012. On March 23, 2012, he visited flood-stricken villages of Karim Bux Jamali, Dargah Shah Gurio and Peero Lashari in Badin District. He was accompanied by US Consul General Willian J. Martin and distributed blankets, quilts, kitchen items and other goods amongst flood survivors.

On March 24, 2012, Penn also visited Bilquis Edhi Female Child Home and met Pakistan’s iconic humanitarian worker Abdul Sattar Edhi and his wife, Bilquis Edhi. He also laid floral wreaths and paid respect at the shrine of Abdullah Shah Ghazi.

Penn is believed to have played a role in getting American entrepreneur Jacob Ostreicher released from a Bolivian prison in 2013, and was credited by Ostreicher for having personally nursed him back to health upon his release.

In March 2010, Penn called for the arrest of those referring to Venezuelan President Hugo Chávez as a dictator. The two were friends, and when Chávez died, Penn said: "Venezuela and its revolution will endure under the proven leadership of Vice President (Nicolás) Maduro. Today the United States lost a friend it never knew it had. And poor people around the world lost a champion. I lost a friend I was blessed to have."

In February 2012, Penn met with the President of Argentina, Cristina Fernández de Kirchner, in Buenos Aires where he made a statement on the long-running dispute between Argentina and the United Kingdom over the Falkland Islands, saying: "I know I came in a very sensitive moment in terms of diplomacy between Argentina and the UK over the Falkland Islands. And I hope that diplomats can establish true dialogue in order to solve the conflict as the world today cannot tolerate ridiculous demonstrations of colonialism. The way of dialogue is the only way to achieve a better solution for both nations."

The comments were taken as support of Argentina's claim to the islands and evoked strong reactions in the British media, with one satirical article in "The Daily Telegraph" requesting that Penn "return his Malibu estate to the Mexicans". Lauren Collins of "The New Yorker" wrote: "As of today, Sean Penn is the new Karl Lagerfeld—the man upon whom, having disrespected something dear to the United Kingdom, the British papers most gleefully pile contempt".

Penn later claimed that he had been misrepresented by the British press and that his criticism of "colonialism" was a reference to the deployment of Prince William as an air-sea rescue pilot, describing it as a "message of pre-emptive intimidation". He claimed that the Prince's posting meant "the automatic deployment of warships", and stated: "My oh my, aren't people sensitive to the word 'colonialism', particularly those who implement colonialism." In a piece written in "The Guardian", Penn wrote that "the legalisation of Argentinian immigration to the Malvinas/Falkland Islands is one that it seems might have been addressed, but for the speculative discovery of booming offshore oil in the surrounding seas this past year". He further wrote that "irresponsible journalism" had suggested "that I had taken a specific position against those currently residing in the Malvinas/Falkland Islands, that they should either be deported or absorbed into Argentine rule. I neither said, nor insinuated that".

At the 87th Academy Awards, Penn presented the award for Best Picture. Before presenting the award to Mexican Alejandro González Iñárritu for "Birdman", Penn joked, "Who gave this son of a bitch his green card?"

His remark caused some people to be offended by the comments, deeming them racist towards Latin Americans, and offensive to those who attempt to legally immigrate into the United States.

Iñarritu said that it was a joke between him and Penn, who worked together on "21 Grams", and that he found it "hilarious." Penn later went on record defending his comments, saying, "I have absolutely no apologies. In fact, I have a big 'fuck you' for every...anybody who is so stupid not to have gotten the irony when you've got a country that is so xenophobic. If they had their way, you wouldn't have great filmmakers like Alejandro working in this country. Thank God we do."

In an interview published September 16, 2015, director and showrunner Lee Daniels responded to criticism about Terrence Howard's continued career in light of his domestic violence issues by referencing Penn's rumored history of domestic violence, saying: "[Terrence] ain't done nothing different than Marlon Brando or Sean Penn, and all of a sudden he's some f—in' demon." In response, Penn launched a $10 million defamation suit against Daniels, alleging that he had never been arrested for or charged with domestic violence. Penn dropped the lawsuit in May 2016 after Daniels retracted his statement and apologized.

A day after Mexican officials announced the capture of Joaquín "El Chapo" Guzmán in a bloody raid, "Rolling Stone" revealed on January 9, 2016 that Sean Penn, along with actress Kate del Castillo, had conducted a secret interview with El Chapo prior to his arrest. Del Castillo was contacted by Guzmán's lawyer (who was under CISEN surveillance) to talk about producing a biographical film over Guzmán and communication increased following Guzmán's escape from prison in July 2015. The deal for the interview was brokered by del Castillo. According to published text messages with del Castillo, Guzmán did not know who Sean Penn was. CISEN released photographs of del Castillo at the meetings with Guzmán's lawyers and of the arrival of the actress and Penn to Mexico.

The interview was criticized by some, including the White House, which called the interview "maddening". Mexican authorities said they were seeking to question Penn over the interview, which had not been approved by either the American or Mexican government. Penn and del Castillo's meeting with Guzmán is under investigation by the Attorney General of Mexico.

Penn has appeared in more than 50 films and won many awards during his career as an actor and director. He has won two Academy Awards for Best Actor for "Mystic River" (2003) and "Milk" (2008), and was nominated three more times in the same category for "Dead Man Walking" (1995), "Sweet and Lowdown" (1999), and "I Am Sam" (2001). He also received a Directors Guild of America nomination for directing "Into the Wild" (2007).



</doc>
<doc id="15821" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15821" title="Jack Lemmon">
Jack Lemmon

John Uhler "Jack" Lemmon III (February 8, 1925 – June 27, 2001) was an American actor and musician. Lemmon was an eight time Academy Award nominee, with two wins. He starred in over 60 films, such as "Some Like It Hot", "The Apartment", "Mister Roberts" (for which he won the 1955 Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor), "Days of Wine and Roses", "The Great Race", "Irma la Douce", "The Odd Couple" and its sequel 30 years later, "The Odd Couple II", (and other frequent collaborations with "Odd Couple" co-star Walter Matthau), "Save the Tiger" (for which he won the 1973 Academy Award for Best Actor), "The Out-of-Towners", "The China Syndrome", "Missing" (for which he won Best Actor at the 1982 Cannes Film Festival), "Glengarry Glen Ross", "Tuesdays with Morrie", "Grumpy Old Men", and "Grumpier Old Men".

Lemmon was born on February 8, 1925, in an elevator at Newton-Wellesley Hospital in Newton, Massachusetts, a suburb of Boston. He was the only child of Mildred Burgess LaRue and John Uhler Lemmon, Jr., the president of a doughnut company. Lemmon attended John Ward Elementary School in Newton and the Rivers School in Weston, Massachusetts. During his acceptance of his lifetime achievement award, he stated that he knew he wanted to be an actor from the age of eight. Lemmon attended Phillips Academy (Class of 1943) and Harvard College (Class of 1947), where he lived in Eliot House and was an active member of several Drama Clubs – and president of the Hasty Pudding Club – as well as a member of the Delphic Club for Gentleman, a final club at Harvard.

At Harvard, Lemmon was a member of the V-12 Navy College Training Program and was commissioned by the United States Navy, serving briefly as an ensign on an aircraft carrier during World War II before returning to Harvard after completing his military service. After graduation with a degree in War Service Sciences in 1947, Lemmon took up acting professionally, working on radio, television and Broadway. He studied acting under coach Uta Hagen. He was enamored of the piano and learned to play it on his own. He could also play the harmonica, guitar, organ, and the double bass.

Lemmon's film debut was a bit part as a plasterer/painter in the 1949 film "The Lady Takes a Sailor", but he went unnoticed until his debut, opposite Judy Holliday, in the 1954 comedy "It Should Happen to You". Lemmon worked with actresses such as Marilyn Monroe, Natalie Wood, Betty Grable, Janet Leigh, Shirley MacLaine, Lee Remick, Romy Schneider, Doris Day, Kim Novak, Judy Holliday, Rita Hayworth, June Allyson, Virna Lisi, Ann-Margret and Sophia Loren. He was close friends with actors Tony Curtis, Ernie Kovacs, Walter Matthau and Kevin Spacey. He made two films with Curtis, and fifteen with Matthau.

Early in Lemmon's career he met comedian Ernie Kovacs while co-starring with him in "Operation Mad Ball". Lemmon and Kovacs became close friends and appeared together in two subsequent films, "Bell, Book and Candle" and "It Happened to Jane". In 1977, PBS broadcast a compilation series of Kovacs' television work, and Lemmon served as the narrator of the series. Lemmon discussed his friendship with Kovacs in the documentary "Ernie Kovacs: Television's Original Genius".

He was a favorite of director Billy Wilder, starring in the films "Some Like It Hot" (for which he was awarded Best Actor at the Cannes Film Festival), "The Apartment", "Irma la Douce", "The Fortune Cookie", "Avanti!", "The Front Page", and "Buddy Buddy". Wilder felt Lemmon had a natural tendency toward overacting that had to be tempered; the Wilder biography "Nobody's Perfect" quotes the director as saying, "Lemmon, I would describe him as a ham, a fine ham, and with ham you have to trim a little fat". The biography quotes Lemmon as saying, "I am particularly susceptible to the parts I play... If my character was having a nervous breakdown, I started to have one".

He enjoyed longtime working relationships with both Blake Edwards, starring in "Days of Wine and Roses" (1962), "The Great Race" (1965) and "That's Life!" (1986), and Richard Quine, starring in "My Sister Eileen", "Operation Mad Ball"., "Bell, Book and Candle" and "It Happened to Jane" and "How to Murder Your Wife" (1965). Quine also directed Lemmon's screen test when the actor was signed by Columbia.

Lemmon's singing voice was first heard on two film soundtracks in 1955, Three for the Show with Betty Grable and My Sister Eileen. He also performed songs in the 1956 film You Can't Run Away from It with Stubby Kaye and June Allyson. His first solo album "A Twist of Lemmon" was released in 1958 on Epic Records. While filming "Some Like It Hot" with Marilyn Monroe in 1959, Lemmon released a second album, "Some Like It Hot". Both featured Lemmon's singing and piano solos.

The two Epic albums were later released as "A Twist of Lemmon/Some Like It Hot", a single cd on Collector's Choice Music, in 2001. Two singles, "Daphne/Sleepy Lagoon" (released in 1959) and I'm Forever Blowing Bubbles/I Cover the Waterfront (released in 1960) did not appear on either album. Epic released a third single in 1960, Lemmon's piano solo of the theme to the film "The Apartment", backed with his own composition "Lemmon Blues". In 1963, Lemmon released a third album, this time on Capitol Records, entitled "Jack Lemmon Plays Piano Selections from Irma La Douce."

Lemmon was awarded the Best Supporting Actor Oscar in 1956 for "Mister Roberts" (1955) and the Best Actor Oscar for "Save the Tiger" (1973), becoming the first actor to achieve this rare double (the only other actors to achieve this are: Robert De Niro, Gene Hackman, Jack Nicholson, Kevin Spacey and Denzel Washington). He was also nominated for a Best Actor Oscar for his role in the controversial film "Missing" in 1982, and for his roles in "Some Like It Hot" (1959), "The Apartment" (1960), "Days of Wine and Roses" (1962), "The China Syndrome " (1979), and "Tribute" (1980). He won another Cannes award for his performance in "Missing" (which received the Palme d'Or). In 1986, the U.S. National Board of Review of Motion Pictures gave Lemmon a "Career Achievement" award; two years later, the American Film Institute gave him its Lifetime Achievement Award.

"Days of Wine and Roses" (1962) was a favorite role. He portrayed Joe Clay, a young, fun-loving alcoholic businessman. In that film, Lemmon delivered the line, "My name is Joe Clay ... I'm an alcoholic." Three and a half decades later, he stated on the television program "Inside the Actors Studio" that he was a recovering alcoholic.

Lemmon's production company JML produced "Cool Hand Luke" in 1967. Paul Newman was grateful to Lemmon for his support and offered him the role of the Sundance Kid, later played by Robert Redford in "Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid", but Lemmon turned it down. He did not like riding horses and he felt he'd already played too many aspects of the Sundance Kid's character before.
Lemmon appeared in many films partnered with actor Walter Matthau. Among their pairings was 1968's "The Odd Couple", as Felix Ungar (Lemmon) and Oscar Madison (Matthau). The first film they starred in together was "The Fortune Cookie" (for which Matthau won the 1966 Oscar for Best Supporting Actor), "The Front Page" and "Buddy Buddy". In 1971, Lemmon directed Matthau in the comedy "Kotch". It was the only movie that Lemmon directed and Matthau was nominated for the Best Actor Oscar for his performance.

Additionally, Lemmon and Matthau had small parts in Oliver Stone's 1991 film, "JFK" (the only film in which both appeared without sharing screen time). In 1993, the duo teamed again to star in "Grumpy Old Men". The film was a surprise hit, earning the two actors a new generation of young fans. During the rest of the decade, they would star together in "Grumpier Old Men", "Out to Sea", and the widely panned "The Odd Couple II". In 1996, Lemmon was awarded the Honorary Golden Bear award at the 46th Berlin International Film Festival. In 1997, Lemmon was a guest voice on "The Simpsons" episode "The Twisted World of Marge Simpson," playing the character Frank Ormand, owner of the pretzel business that Marge Simpson franchised. The recurring character Gil Gunderson, voiced by Dan Castellaneta, is an ongoing parody of Lemmon's character in "Glengarry Glen Ross".

At the 1998 Golden Globe Awards, he was nominated for "Best Actor in a Made for TV Movie" for his role in "Twelve Angry Men" losing to Ving Rhames. After accepting the award, Rhames asked Lemmon to come on stage and, in a move that stunned the audience, gave his award to him. (The Hollywood Foreign Press Association, which presents the Golden Globes, had a second award made and sent to Rhames.). He received the AFI Life Achievement Award in 1988.

Lemmon won the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Miniseries or a Movie for his role as Morrie Schwartz in his final television role, "Tuesdays with Morrie". His final film role was an uncredited one: the narrator in Robert Redford's film "The Legend of Bagger Vance".

Actor Kevin Spacey recalled that Lemmon is remembered for always making time for other people. Already regarded as a legend, he met teenage Spacey backstage after a theater performance and spoke to him about pursuing an acting career. Spacey would later work with Lemmon in "The Murder of Mary Phagan" (1987), "Dad" (1989), the critically acclaimed film "Glengarry Glen Ross" (1992) and on stage in a revival of "Long Day's Journey into Night". Lemmon was Spacey's mentor, and taught Spacey that people who do well in a business have an obligation to "send the elevator back down" to help lift people starting out on the ground floor.

In his autobiography, "My Life", Burt Reynolds recalls Lemmon as the quintessential gentleman who never spoke ill of anyone, even if they deserved it. This kindness backfired for Reynolds: prior to accepting the lead in "W.W. and the Dixie Dancekings" (1975), directed by John G. Avildsen, Reynolds asked Lemmon, whom Avildsen had directed in "Save the Tiger" (1973) for an opinion of Avildsen as a director. Lemmon told Reynolds that Avildsen was "okay", and Reynolds accepted the role. After the film was released and his experiences in production proved unhappy, Reynolds complained to Lemmon and described Avildsen as an "asshole", whereupon Lemmon replied, "I guess you could say that."

Lemmon was married twice. His first wife was actress Cynthia Stone, with whom he had a son, Chris Lemmon (born 1954). His second wife was actress Felicia Farr, with whom he had a daughter, Courtney (born 1966). Farr had a daughter from a previous relationship (her marriage to Lee Farr) named Denise. Lemmon was a Catholic. He publicly announced his alcoholism during a 1998 interview on "Inside the Actors Studio".

To golfers everywhere Lemmon was known as the "star" of the celebrity-packed third round telecast of the annual AT&T Pebble Beach Pro-Am, held at Pebble Beach Golf Links each February. Lemmon's packed gallery was there not only for his humor but also to root him on in his lifelong quest to "make the cut" to round 4, something he was not able to achieve. The amateur who helps his team most in the Pro-Am portion is annually awarded the Jack Lemmon Award.

During the 1980s and 1990s Lemmon served on the advisory board of the National Student Film Institute.

Lemmon was a registered Democrat.

Lemmon died of metastatic cancer of the bladder on June 27, 2001. He had been fighting the disease, privately, for two years before his death. He was interred at Westwood Village Memorial Park Cemetery in Westwood, California, buried near his friend and co-star, Walter Matthau, who died almost exactly one year before Lemmon. His gravestone reads like a title screen from a film: "JACK LEMMON in"





</doc>
<doc id="4537" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4537" title="Burt Lancaster">
Burt Lancaster

Burton Stephen Lancaster (November 2, 1913 – October 20, 1994) was an American actor and producer. Initially known for playing "tough guys", he went on to achieve success with more complex and challenging roles. He was nominated four times for Academy Awards and won once for his work in "Elmer Gantry" in 1960. He also won a Golden Globe for that performance and BAFTA Awards for "The Birdman of Alcatraz" (1962) and "Atlantic City" (1980).

During the 1950s, his production company Hecht-Hill-Lancaster was highly successful, making films such as "Trapeze" (1956), "Sweet Smell of Success" (1957), "Run Silent, Run Deep" (1958), and "Separate Tables" (1958). The American Film Institute ranks Lancaster as #19 of the greatest male stars of classic Hollywood cinema.

Burton Stephen Lancaster was born on November 2, 1913 in Manhattan, New York, at his parents' home at 209 East 106th Street, the son of Elizabeth ("née" Roberts) and mailman James Henry Lancaster. Both of his parents were Protestants of working class origin. All four of his grandparents were Irish immigrants to the United States, from the province of Ulster; his maternal grandparents were from Belfast and were descendants of English immigrants to Ireland. The family believed themselves to be related to Frederick Roberts, 1st Earl Roberts. Lancaster grew up in East Harlem and spent much of his time on the streets, where he developed great interest and skill in gymnastics while attending DeWitt Clinton High School, where he was a basketball star. Before he graduated from DeWitt Clinton, his mother died of a cerebral hemorrhage. Lancaster was accepted by New York University with an athletic scholarship, but subsequently dropped out.

At the age of 19, Lancaster met Nick Cravat, with whom he developed a lifelong partnership. Together they learned to act in local theatre productions and circus arts at Union Settlement, one of the city's oldest settlement houses. They formed the acrobat duo Lang and Cravat in the 1930s and soon joined the Kay Brothers circus. However, in 1939, an injury forced Lancaster to give up the profession, with great regret. He then found temporary work, first as a salesman for Marshall Fields and then as a singing waiter in various restaurants.

With the United States having then entered World War II, Lancaster joined the United States Army in 1942 and performed with the Army's 21st Special Services Division, one of the military groups organized to follow the troops on the ground and provide USO entertainment to keep up morale. He served with General Mark Clark's Fifth Army in Italy from 1943 to 1945.

Although initially unenthusiastic about acting, after returning to New York from his Army service, Lancaster auditioned for a Broadway play and was offered a role. Although Harry Brown's "A Sound of Hunting" had a run of only three weeks, Lancaster's performance attracted the interest of a Hollywood agent, Harold Hecht and, through him, Lancaster was brought to the attention of producer Hal B. Wallis, who signed him to an eight-movie contract. Lancaster's first filmed movie was "Desert Fury". Fortunately for Lancaster, producer Mark Hellinger approached him to star in "The Killers", in 1946, which was completed and released prior to "Desert Fury" and to great critical success.

The tall, muscular actor won significant acclaim and appeared in two more films the following year. Subsequently, he played in a variety of films, especially in dramas, thrillers, and military and adventure films. In two, "The Flame and the Arrow" and "The Crimson Pirate," his friend from his circus years, Nick Cravat, played a key supporting role, and both actors impressed audiences with their acrobatic prowess.

In 1953, Lancaster played one of his best-remembered roles with Deborah Kerr in "From Here to Eternity." The American Film Institute acknowledged the iconic status of the scene from that film in which Deborah Kerr and he make love on a Hawaiian beach amid the crashing waves. The organization named it one of "AFI's top 100 Most Romantic Films" of all time.

Lancaster won the 1960 Academy Award for Best Actor, a Golden Globe Award, and the New York Film Critics Award for his performance in "Elmer Gantry". He followed this with widely diverse roles, including a Nazi war criminal on trial for his life in "Judgment at Nuremberg", a convict serving a life sentence in "Birdman of Alcatraz", and a proud Italian nobleman in "The Leopard". He also played a US Air Force general attempting a coup in the political thriller "Seven Days in May".
In 1966, at the age of 52, Lancaster appeared nude in director Frank Perry's film, "The Swimmer" in what the critic Roger Ebert called "his finest performance". Prior to working on "The Swimmer", Lancaster was terrified of the water because he did not know how to swim. In preparation for the film, he took swimming lessons from UCLA swim coach Bob Horn. The film was not released until 1968, when it proved to be a commercial failure, though Lancaster remained proud of the movie and his performance.

Lancaster co-starred with Lee Marvin in the 1966 western adventure film, "The Professionals", and with Dean Martin in the first of the so-called disaster film blockbusters, "Airport", one of the biggest box-office hits of 1970 and, at that time, reportedly the highest-grossing film in the history of Universal Pictures.

During the latter part of his career, Lancaster left adventure and acrobatic films behind and portrayed more distinguished characters. This period brought him work on several international productions, with directors such as Luchino Visconti, Bernardo Bertolucci and Louis Malle. His last Oscar nomination was for Malle's 1980 film "Atlantic City".

Lancaster sought demanding roles, and if he liked a part or a director, he was prepared to work for much lower pay than he might have earned elsewhere. He even helped to finance movies in whose artistic value he believed. He also mentored directors such as Sydney Pollack and John Frankenheimer and appeared in several television films. Lancaster's last film was "Field of Dreams" (1989).

For his contribution to the motion picture industry, Lancaster has a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame at 6801 Hollywood Boulevard.

Lancaster was an early and successful actor/producer. When approached to venture into the film business, after having been in the theater for only a brief period, he chose not to sign with a major studio. Instead he signed with agent Harold Hecht, who promised him the opportunity to produce their own movies within five years of hitting Hollywood. Hecht kept his promise and the two formed a partnership production company under the name Norma Productions, named after Lancaster's wife. Their first movie together was "Kiss the Blood Off My Hands", released in 1948. Hecht and Lancaster produced two additional films in the early 1950s under the Norma Productions company; "The Flame and the Arrow" in 1950 and "Ten Tall Men" in 1951, two swashbucklers selected to showcase Lancaster's acrobatic skills.

In 1951 the actor/producer duo changed the company's name to Hecht-Lancaster Productions. The first film under the new name was another swashbuckler: "The Crimson Pirate", released in 1952. This was followed by "Apache" two years later. In 1954 Lancaster was hired to star in the Warner Brothers film "His Majesty O'Keefe". This proved to be a turning point for both Lancaster and his company. Lancaster had insisted that the film be produced by Hecht. "His Majesty O'Keefe" featured a new Hollywood writer on board. James Hill immediately hit it off with Lancaster and Hecht, and he was invited to co-produce upcoming Hecht-Lancaster films, giving up his writer position. His first as a producer was "Vera Cruz", released in 1954. 

Without Hill, Hecht and Lancaster produced "Marty", a 1955 film starring Ernest Borgnine, which won both the Academy Award for Best Picture and the Palme d'Or award at the Cannes Film Festival. "Marty" was also the first film produced by the company not to feature Lancaster in an acting role. "Vera Cruz" had been a huge success but "Marty" secured Hecht-Lancaster as one of the most successful independent production companies in Hollywood at the time. "The Kentuckian" (1955) was directed by Lancaster in his directorial debut.

In 1955 Hill was made an equal partner in the company and the name was upgraded to Hecht-Hill-Lancaster, releasing their first film in 1956, "Trapeze", in which Lancaster performed many of his own stunts. "Trapeze" went on to become the production company's top box office success. Following "Trapeze" Lancaster worked with Tony Curtis again on "Sweet Smell of Success" (released in 1957), a co-production between Hecht-Hill-Lancaster and Curtis' own company Curtleigh Productions (co-owned with his wife, Janet Leigh). In 1956 Lancaster and Hecht entered the music industry with the companies Hecht-Lancaster & Buzzell Music and Calyork Music.

Hecht-Hill-Lancaster produced seven additional films in the late 1950s; four starring Lancaster; "Run Silent, Run Deep" (1958), "Separate Tables" (1958), "The Devil's Disciple" (1959) and "The Unforgiven" (1960), and three without Lancaster: "The Bachelor Party" (1956), "Take a Giant Step" (1959) and "Summer of the Seventeenth Doll" (1960). Additionally Hecht-Hill-Lancaster served as the production company for the 1960-1961 TV series "Whiplash". The "H-H-L" team impressed Hollywood with its success; as "Life" wrote in 1957, "[a]fter the independent production of a baker's dozen of pictures, it has yet to have its first flop ... (They were also good pictures.)." 
The Hecht-Hill-Lancaster Productions company dissolved in 1960, after Hill ruptured his relation with both Hecht and Lancaster. Hill went on to produce a single additional film, "The Happy Thieves", in a new production company, Hillworth Productions, co-owned with his wife Rita Hayworth. Hecht and Lancaster worked on two more films together: "The Young Savages", released in 1961, and "Birdman of Alcatraz", released in 1962 through Norma Productions as the production company's final film. Hecht went on to produce five films without Lancaster's assistance, through his company Harold Hecht Films Productions between 1961 and 1967, including another Academy Award winner, "Cat Ballou", starring Lee Marvin and Jane Fonda. Lancaster and Hecht would reunite twelve years after "Birdman of Alcatraz" for what ended up being Hecht's final film, "Ulzana's Raid", in 1972.

In 1967, Lancaster formed a new partnership with Roland Kibbee, who had already worked as a writer on five Lancaster projects; "Ten Tall Men", "The Crimson Pirate", "Three Sailors and a Girl" (in which Lancaster made a cameo appearance), "Vera Cruz" and "The Devil's Disciple". Through Norlan Productions, Lancaster and Kibbee produced "The Scalphunters" in 1968, "Valdez Is Coming" in 1971 (which was also written by Kibbee) and "The Midnight Man" in 1974. "The Midnight Man" was written, produced and directed by both Kibbee and Lancaster, and would be the actor's final film as a producer. In his career, Lancaster produced twenty-three films, directed two and wrote for one.

Lancaster appeared in a total of 17 films produced by his agent Harold Hecht. Eight of these were co-produced by James Hill. He also appeared in eight films produced by Hal B. Wallis and two with producer Mark Hellinger. Although Lancaster's work alongside Kirk Douglas was mostly known as a successful pair of actors, Douglas in fact produced four films for the pair, through his production companies Bryna Productions and Joel Productions. Roland Kibbee also produced three Lancaster films. Lancaster was also cast in two Stanley Kramer productions.

John Frankenheimer directed five films with Lancaster: "The Young Savages" (1961), "Birdman of Alcatraz" (1962), "Seven Days in May" (1964), "The Train" (1964), and "The Gypsy Moths" (1969). He was directed four times by Robert Aldrich, three times by Robert Siodmak and Sydney Pollack, and twice by Byron Haskin, Daniel Mann, John Sturges, John Huston, Richard Brooks, Alexander Mackendrick, Luchino Visconti, and Michael Winner.

Roland Kibbee wrote for seven Lancaster films. Lancaster used make-up veteran Robert Schiffer in 20 credited films, hiring Schiffer on nearly all the films he produced.

Lancaster vigorously guarded his private life. He was married three times. His first two marriages, to June Ernst from 1935 to 1946 and Norma Anderson from 1946 to 1969, ended in divorce. His third marriage, to Susan Martin, lasted from September 1990 until his death in 1994. All five of his children were with Anderson: Bill (who became an actor and screenwriter), James, Susan, Joanna, and Sighle (pronounced "Sheila"). He claimed he was romantically involved with Deborah Kerr during the filming of "From Here to Eternity" in 1953. However, Kerr stated that while there was a spark of attraction, nothing ever happened. He reportedly had an affair with Joan Blondell.

In her 1980 autobiography, Shelley Winters claimed to have had a long affair with him. Recent biographers and others believe that Lancaster was bisexual, and that he had intimate relationships with men as well as women. According to testimony in Kate Buford's "Burt Lancaster: An American Life", Lancaster was devotedly loyal to his friends and family. Old friends from his childhood remained his friends for life.

Lancaster was a vocal supporter of liberal political causes, and frequently spoke out in support of racial minorities, including at the March on Washington in 1963. He was a vocal opponent of the Vietnam War and political movements such as McCarthyism, and he helped pay for the successful defense of a soldier accused of "fragging" (murdering) another soldier during that war. In 1968, Lancaster actively supported the presidential candidacy of antiwar Senator Eugene McCarthy of Minnesota, and frequently spoke on his behalf during the Democratic primaries. He campaigned heavily for George McGovern in the 1972 presidential election. In 1985, Lancaster joined the fight against AIDS after his close friend, Rock Hudson, contracted the disease. He campaigned for Michael Dukakis in the 1988 presidential election.

The centennial of Lancaster's birth was honored at New York City's Film Society of Lincoln Center in May 2013 with the screening of 12 of the actor's finest films, from "The Killers" of 1946 to "Atlantic City" in 1981.

Despite his Protestant background and upbringing, Lancaster identified himself as an atheist later in life.

As Lancaster grew older, he became increasingly plagued by atherosclerosis, barely surviving a routine gall bladder operation in January 1980. Following two minor heart attacks, he had to undergo an emergency quadruple coronary bypass in 1983, after which he was extremely weak. However, he still managed to continue acting. In 1988, Lancaster was well enough to attend a Congressional hearing with old colleagues such as Jimmy Stewart and Ginger Rogers to protest media magnate Ted Turner's plan to colorize various black-and-white films from the 1930s and 1940s.

Lancaster's acting career ended after he suffered a stroke on November 30, 1990, which left him partly paralyzed and largely unable to speak. He died in his apartment in Century City, California, from a third heart attack at 4:50 am on October 20, 1994, at the age of 80. just 13 days shy of his 81st birthday. He was cremated and his ashes were buried under a large oak tree in Westwood Memorial Park located in Westwood Village, California. A small, square ground plaque inscribed only with "BURT LANCASTER 1913–1994" marks his final resting place. Upon his death, as he requested, he had no memorial or funeral service.

For a number of years exhibitors voted Lancaster as among the most popular stars:

Spanish music group Hombres G released an album named "La cagaste, Burt Lancaster" ("You messed up, Burt Lancaster") in 1986. Thomas Hart Benton painted a scene from "The Kentuckian" as part of the film's marketing. Lancaster posed for the painting, also known as "The Kentuckian".



</doc>
<doc id="61797" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61797" title="Yul Brynner">
Yul Brynner

Yul Brynner (born Yuliy Borisovich Briner, ; July 11, 1920 – October 10, 1985) was a Russian-born film and stage actor.

Brynner was best known for his portrayal of King Mongkut of Siam in the Rodgers and Hammerstein musical "The King and I", for which he won two Tony Awards and an Academy Award for the film version. He played the role 4,625 times on stage. He also starred as Ramesses II in the 1956 Cecil B. DeMille blockbuster "The Ten Commandments", and played General Bounine in the 1956 film "Anastasia", the gunman Chris Adams in "The Magnificent Seven" and its first sequel "Return of the Seven", and the android "The Gunslinger" in "Westworld" and its sequel "Futureworld".

Brynner was noted for his distinctive voice and for his shaved head, which he maintained as a personal trademark long after adopting it in 1951 for his role in "The King and I". Earlier, he was a model and television director, and later a photographer and the author of two books.

Yul Brynner was born Yuliy Borisovich Briner July 11, 1920 in Vladivostok, Far Eastern Republic (present-day Primorsky Krai, Russia). He enjoyed telling tall tales and exaggerating his background and early life for the press, claiming that he was born "Taidje Khan" of part-Mongol parentage, on the Russian island of Sakhalin. In reality of Swiss-German, Russian, and partial Buryat ancestry, he was born at home in a four-story residence at 15 Aleutskaya Street, Vladivostok. He had an elder sister, Vera. He occasionally referred to himself as Julius Briner, Jules Bryner or Youl Bryner. The 1989 biography by his son, Rock Brynner, clarified some of these issues.

His father, Boris Yuliyevich Briner, was a mining engineer and inventor, who was of Swiss-German and Russian descent, whose father, Jules Briner, was a Swiss citizen who moved to Vladivostok in the 1870s and established a successful import/export company. Brynner's paternal grandmother, Natalya Yosifovna Kurkutova, was a native of Irkutsk and a Eurasian of part Buryat ancestry. Brynner's mother, Marousia Dimitrievna (née Blagovidova), came from the Russian intelligentsia and studied to be an actress and singer. Brynner felt a strong personal connection to the Romani people; in 1977, Brynner was named honorary president of the International Romani Union, an office that he kept until his death.

Boris Briner's work required extensive travel, and in 1923, he fell in love with an actress, Katya Kornukova, at the Moscow Art Theatre, and soon after abandoned his family. Yul's mother took his elder sister, Vera (January 17, 1916 – December 13, 1967), and him to Harbin, China, where they attended a school run by the YMCA. 

In 1932, fearing a war between China and Japan, she took them to Paris. Brynner played his guitar in Russian nightclubs in Paris, sometimes accompanying his sister, playing Russian and Roma songs. He trained as a trapeze acrobat and worked in a French circus troupe for five years, but after sustaining a back injury, he turned to acting. In 1938, his mother was diagnosed with leukemia, and they briefly moved back to Harbin.

In 1940, speaking little English, he and his mother emigrated to the United States aboard the , arriving in New York City on October 25, 1940, where his sister already lived. Vera, a singer, starred in "The Consul" on Broadway in 1950 and appeared at The Metropolitan Opera as Prince Orlofsky in "Die Fledermaus" and on television in the title role of "Carmen". She later taught voice in New York.

During World War II, Brynner worked as a French-speaking radio announcer and commentator for the US Office of War Information, broadcasting to occupied France. At the same time, he studied acting in Connecticut with the Russian teacher Michael Chekhov. 
Brynner's first Broadway performance was a small part in Shakespeare's "Twelfth Night" in December 1941. Brynner found little acting work during the next few years, but among other acting stints, he co-starred in a 1946 production of "Lute Song" with Mary Martin. He also did some modelling work and was photographed nude by George Platt Lynes.

Brynner's first marriage was to actress Virginia Gilmore in 1944, and soon after he began working as a director at the new CBS television studios, directing "Studio One", among other shows. He made his film debut in "Port of New York" released in November 1949. 

The next year, at the urging of Martin, he auditioned for Rodgers and Hammerstein's new musical in New York. He recalled that, as he was finding success as a director on television, he was reluctant to go back on the stage. Once he read the script, however, he was fascinated by the character of the King and was eager to perform in the project.

His role as King Mongkut in "The King and I" (4,625 times on stage) became his best known role. He appeared in the original 1951 production and later touring productions, as well as a 1977 Broadway revival, a London production in 1979, and another Broadway revival in 1985. He won Tony Awards for both the first and the last of these Broadway productions. He also appeared in the 1956 film version, for which he won an Academy Award as Best Actor and in "Anna and the King", a short-lived TV version on CBS in 1972. Brynner is one of only eight people who have won both a Tony and an Academy Award for the same role. His connection to the story and the role of King Mongkut is so deep that he was mentioned in the song "One Night in Bangkok", from the 1984 musical "Chess", the second act of which is set in Bangkok.

In 1951, Brynner shaved his head for his role in "The King and I". Following the huge success of the Broadway production and subsequent film, Brynner continued to shave his head for the rest of his life, though he wore a wig for certain roles. Brynner's shaven head was unusual at the time, and his striking appearance helped to give him an exotic appeal. Some fans shaved off their hair to imitate him, and a shaven head was often referred to as the "Yul Brynner look". Brynner reprised his "Shall We Dance?" segment with Patricia Morison on the TV special "", broadcast March 28, 1954 on all four American TV networks of the time.

Brynner's second film was the film version of "The King and I" (1956) with Deborah Kerr. It was a huge success critically and commercially.

Cecil B. de Mille hired him for "The Ten Commandments" (1956) to play Ramesses II opposite Charlton Heston. He rounded out his year with "Anastasia" (1956) co starring with Ingrid Bergman under the direction of Anatole Litvak. Both films were big hits and Brynner became one of the most in-demand stars in Hollywood.

MGM cast him as one of "The Brothers Karamazov" (1957), which was another commercial success. Less so was "The Buccaneer" (1958) in which Brynner played Jean Lafitte; he co-starred with Heston and the film was produced by De Mille but directed by Anthony Quinn.

MGM used Brynner again in "The Journey" (1959), opposite Kerr under the direction of Litvak, but the film lost money. So too did "The Sound and the Fury" (1959) based on the novel by William Faulkner with Joanne Woodward.

However Brynner then received an offer to replace Tyrone Power who had died during the making of "Solomon and Sheba" (1959) with Gina Lollobrigida. The movie was a huge hit. It did mean though that a proposed Brynner film about Spartacus had to be postponed; when the Kirk Douglas film came out Brynner elected not to make it.

Brynner tried comedy with two films directed by Stanley Donen: "Once More, with Feeling!" (1960) and "Surprise Package" (1960) but public response was underwhelming. He made a cameo in "Testament of Orpheus" (1960).

The public did like "The Magnificent Seven" (1960) a Western remake of "Seven Samurai" for the Mirisch Brothers. It was a box office disappointment on initial release in the US but proved hugely popular in Europe and was very durable. It led to Brynner signing a three-picture deal with the Mirisches. He made a cameo in "Goodbye Again" (1961).

Brynner focused on action films. He did "Escape from Zahrain" (1962) with Ronald Neame and "Taras Bulba" (1962) with Tony Curtis for J. Lee Thompson. Both films were commercial disappointments; "Taras Bulba" was popular but failed to recoup its large cost.

The first film under his three-picture deal with Mirisch was "Flight from Ashiya" (1963) with George Chakiris. It was followed by "Kings of the Sun" (1963), also with Chakiris, directed by Thompson. Neither film was particularly popular; nor was "Invitation to a Gunfighter" (1964), a Western. 

"Morituri" (1965), opposite Marlon Brando, failed to reverse the series of unsuccessful movies. He had cameos in "Cast a Giant Shadow" (1966) and "The Poppy Is Also a Flower" (1966).

Brynner enjoyed his first hit in a number of years with "Return of the Seven" (1966), reprising his role from the original. Less popular was "Triple Cross" (1966), a war movie with Christopher Plummer; "The Double Man" (1967), a spy thriller; "The Long Duel" (1967), an Imperial adventure tale opposite Trevor Howard; "Villa Rides" (1968), a Western; and "The File of the Golden Goose" (1969).

Brynner went to Yugoslavia to appear in a war film, "Battle of Neretva" (1969). He supported Katharine Hepburn in the big budget flop "The Madwoman of Chaillot" (1969). Brynner appeared in drag (as a torch singer) in an unbilled role in the Peter Sellers comedy "The Magic Christian" (1969).

Brynner went to Italy to make a Spaghetti Western, "Adiós, Sabata" (1970) and supported Kirk Douglas in "The Light at the Edge of the World" (1971). He remained in lead roles for "Romance of a Horsethief" (1971) and a Western "Catlow" (1971).

Brynner had a small role in "Fuzz" (1972) then reprised his most famous part in the TV series "Anna and the King" (1972) which ran for 12 episodes.

After "Night Flight from Moscow" (1973) in Europe, Brynner had his first hit in years with "Westworld" (1973). Brynner's next two films were variations on this performance: "The Ultimate Warrior" (1975) and "Futureworld" (1976). 

Brynner returned to Broadway in "Home Sweet Homer", a notorious flop musical. His final movie was "Death Rage" (1976), an Italian action film.

In addition to his work as a director and performer, Brynner was an active photographer and wrote two books. His daughter Victoria put together "Yul Brynner: Photographer" (), a collection of his photographs of family, friends, and fellow actors, as well as those he took while serving as a UN special consultant on refugees. Brynner wrote "Bring Forth the Children: A Journey to the Forgotten People of Europe and the Middle East" (1960), with photographs by himself and Magnum photographer Inge Morath, and "The Yul Brynner Cookbook: Food Fit for the King and You" (1983 ).

He was also an accomplished guitarist. In his early period in Europe, he often played and sang gypsy songs in Parisian nightclubs with Aliosha Dimitrievitch. He sang some of those same songs in the film "The Brothers Karamazov". In 1967, Dimitrievitch and he released a record album "The Gypsy and I: Yul Brynner Sings Gypsy Songs" (Vanguard VSD 79265).

Brynner married four times. The first three marriages ended in divorce. He fathered three children and adopted two. His first wife was actress Virginia Gilmore (1944–1960) with whom he had one child, Yul 'Rock' Brynner (born December 23, 1946). His father nicknamed him "Rock" when he was six years old in honor of boxer Rocky Graziano. Rock is a historian, novelist, and university history lecturer at Marist College in Poughkeepsie, New York and Western Connecticut State University in Danbury, Connecticut.

In 2006, Rock wrote a book about his father and his family history titled "Empire and Odyssey: The Brynners in Far East Russia and Beyond". He regularly returned to Vladivostok, the city of his father's birth, for the "Pacific Meridian" Film Festival. Yul Brynner had a long affair with Marlene Dietrich, who was 19 years his senior, beginning during the first production of "The King and I".

In 1959, Brynner fathered a daughter, Lark Brynner, with Frankie Tilden, who was 20 years old. Lark lived with her mother and Brynner supported her financially. His second wife, from 1960 to 1967, Doris Kleiner, was a Chilean model whom he married on the set during shooting of "The Magnificent Seven" in 1960. They had one child, Victoria Brynner (born November 1962), whose godmother was Audrey Hepburn. Belgian novelist and artist Monique Watteau was also romantically linked with Brynner, from 1961–1967.

His third wife, Jacqueline Thion de la Chaume (1971–1981), a French socialite, was the widow of Philippe de Croisset (son of French playwright Francis de Croisset and a publishing executive). Brynner and Jacqueline adopted two Vietnamese children: Mia (1974) and Melody (1975). The first house Brynner owned was the Manoir de Criqueboeuf, a 16th-century manor house that Jacqueline and he purchased. His 1980 announcement that he would continue in the role of the King for another long tour and Broadway run, together with his affairs with female fans and his neglect of his wife and children, purportedly broke up this marriage.

On April 4, 1983, aged 62, Brynner married his fourth and final wife, Kathy Lee (born 1957), a 24-year-old ballerina from Ipoh, Malaysia, whom he had met in a production of "The King and I" . They remained married for the last two years of his life.

Brynner, a Swiss citizen, was naturalized as a U.S. citizen after applying in 1943, at the age of 22, while living in New York as an actor and radio announcer. However, in June 1965, he renounced his US citizenship at the U.S. Embassy in Berne, Switzerland, for tax reasons. He had lost his tax exemption as an American resident abroad by working too long in the United States and would have been bankrupted by his tax and penalty debts.

Brynner began smoking heavily at age 12, and although his promotional photos often showed him with a cigarette in hand, he quit the habit in 1971. In September 1983, he found a lump on his vocal cords. In Los Angeles, only hours before his 4,000th performance in "The King and I", he received the test results indicating that while his throat was fine, he had inoperable lung cancer. He and the national tour of the musical were forced to take a few months off while he underwent radiation therapy, which hurt his throat and made it impossible for him to sing or speak easily. The tour then resumed.

In January 1985, nine months before his death, the tour reached New York for a farewell Broadway run. Aware he was dying, he gave an interview on "Good Morning America" discussing the dangers of smoking and expressing his desire to make an anti-smoking commercial. The Broadway production of "The King and I" ran from January 7 to June 30 of that year, with Mary Beth Peil as Anna. His last performance marked the 4625th time he had played the role of the King. Meanwhile, Brynner and the American Cancer Society created a public service announcement using a clip from the "Good Morning America" interview.

Brynner died of lung cancer on October 10, 1985, in New York City. A few days after his death, the recorded anti-cigarette public service announcement was shown on all the major US television networks and in many other countries. In it, he expressed his desire to make an anti-smoking commercial after discovering how sick he was, and that his death was imminent. He then looked directly into the camera for 30 seconds and said, "Now that I'm gone, I tell you: "Don't" smoke. Whatever you do, just don't smoke. If I could take back that smoking, we wouldn't be talking about any cancer. I'm convinced of that."

He was interred in the grounds of the Saint-Michel-de-Bois-Aubry Orthodox monastery, near Luzé, between Tours and Poitiers in France (47.009N, 0.486E).


On September 28, 2012, a 2.4-m-tall statue was inaugurated at Yul Brynner Park, in front of the home where he was born at Aleutskaya St. No. 15 in Vladivostok, Russia. Created by local sculptor Alexei Bokiy, the monument was carved in granite from China. The grounds for the park were donated by the city of Vladivostok, which also paid additional costs. Vladivostok Mayor Igor Pushkariov, US Consul General Sylvia Curran, and Yul's son, Rock Brynner, participated in the ceremony, along with hundreds of local residents.


Short subjects

At the height of his career Yul Brynner was voted by exhibitors as among the most popular stars at the box office:




</doc>
<doc id="113471" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=113471" title="José Ferrer">
José Ferrer

José Vicente Ferrer de Otero y Cintrón (January 8, 1912 – January 26, 1992), known as José Ferrer, was a Puerto Rican actor and theatre and film director. He was the first Puerto Rican-born actor, as well as the first Hispanic actor, to win an Academy Award (in 1950 for "Cyrano de Bergerac").

In 1947, Ferrer won the Tony Award for his theatrical performance of "Cyrano de Bergerac", and in 1952, he won the Distinguished Dramatic Actor Award for "The Shrike", and also the Outstanding Director Award for directing the plays "The Shrike", "The Fourposter", and "Stalag 17".

Ferrer's contributions to American theatre were recognized in 1981, when he was inducted into the American Theater Hall of Fame. In 1985 he received the National Medal of Arts from Ronald Reagan, becoming the first actor to receive that honor. On April 26, 2012, the United States Postal Service issued a stamp in Ferrer's honor in its Distinguished Americans series.

Ferrer was born in San Juan, Puerto Rico, the son of María Providencia Cintrón, who was from the small coastal town of Yabucoa, Puerto Rico, and Rafael Ferrer, an attorney and writer from San Juan. He was the grandson of Gabriel Ferrer Hernández, a doctor and advocate of Puerto Rican independence from Spain. He had two younger sisters, Elvira and Leticia. He studied at the Swiss boarding school Institut Le Rosey. In 1933, Ferrer completed his bachelor's degree at Princeton University, where he wrote his senior thesis on "French Naturalism and Pardo Bazán". Ferrer was also a member of the Princeton Triangle Club.

Ferrer made his Broadway debut in 1935. In 1940, he played his first starring role on Broadway, the title role in "Charley's Aunt", partly in drag. He played Iago in Margaret Webster's Broadway production of "Othello" (1943), which starred Paul Robeson in the title role, Webster as Emilia, and Ferrer's wife, Uta Hagen, as Desdemona. That production still holds the record for longest-running repeat performance of a Shakespearean play presented in the United States. His Broadway directing credits include "The Shrike", "Stalag 17", "The Fourposter", "Twentieth Century", "Carmelina", "My Three Angels", and "The Andersonville Trial".

Ferrer may be best remembered for his performance in the title role of "Cyrano de Bergerac", which he first played on Broadway in 1946. Ferrer feared that the production would be a failure in rehearsals, due to the open dislike for the play by director Mel Ferrer (no relation), so he called in Joshua Logan (who had directed his star-making performance in "Charley's Aunt") to serve as "play doctor" for the production. Logan wrote that he simply had to eliminate pieces of business which director Ferrer had inserted in his staging; they presumably were intended to sabotage the more sentimental elements of the play that the director considered to be corny and in bad taste. The production became one of the hits of the 1946/47 Broadway season, winning Ferrer the first Best Actor Tony Award for his depiction of the long-nosed poet/swordsman. 

He reprised the role of Cyrano onstage at the New York City Center under his own direction in 1953, as well as in two films: the 1950 film of Edmond Rostand's play directed by Michael Gordon and the 1964 French film "Cyrano et d'Artagnan" directed by Abel Gance.

Ferrer would go on to voice a highly truncated cartoon version of the play for an episode of "The ABC Afterschool Special" in 1974, and made his farewell to the part by performing a short passage from the play for the 1986 Tony Awards telecast.

Ferrer made his film debut in the Technicolor epic "Joan of Arc" (1948) as the weak-willed Dauphin opposite Ingrid Bergman as Joan. Leading roles in the films "Whirlpool" (opposite Gene Tierney) (1949) and "Crisis" (opposite Cary Grant) (1950) followed, and culminated in the 1950 film "Cyrano de Bergerac". He next played the role of Toulouse-Lautrec in John Huston's fictional 1952 biopic, "Moulin Rouge".

Beginning circa 1950, Ferrer concentrated on film work, but would return to the stage occasionally. In 1959 Ferrer directed the original stage production of Saul Levitt's "The Andersonville Trial", about the trial following the revelation of conditions at the infamous Civil War prison. It was a hit and featured George C. Scott. 

He took over the direction of the troubled musical "Juno" from Vincent J. Donehue, who had himself taken over from Tony Richardson. The show, which starred Shirley Booth, folded after 16 performances and mixed-to extremely negative critical reaction. The show's commercial failure (along with his earlier flop, "Oh, Captain!"), was a considerable setback to Ferrer's directing career. Nor did the short-lived "The Girl Who Came to Supper" do much for his acting career. A notable performance of his later stage career was as Miguel de Cervantes and his fictional creation Don Quixote in the hit musical "Man of La Mancha". 

Ferrer took over the role from Richard Kiley in 1966 and subsequently went on tour with it in the first national company of the show. Tony Martinez continued in the role of Sancho Panza under Ferrer, as he had with Kiley. During the Bicentennial, Ferrer narrated the world premiere of Michael Jeffrey Shapiro's A Declaration of Independence, July 4, 1776 for narrator and orchestra with the Philharmonic Symphony of Westchester, Martin Rich, conductor.

He portrayed the Rev. Davidson in 1953's "Miss Sadie Thompson" (a remake of "Rain") opposite Rita Hayworth; Barney Greenwald, the embittered defense attorney, in 1954's "The Caine Mutiny"; and operetta composer Sigmund Romberg in the MGM musical biopic "Deep in My Heart". In 1955 Ferrer directed himself in the film version of "The Shrike", with June Allyson. "The Cockleshell Heroes" followed a year later, along with "The Great Man", both of which he also directed. In 1958 Ferrer directed and appeared in "I Accuse!" (as Alfred Dreyfus) and "The High Cost of Loving". Ferrer also directed, but did not appear in, "Return to Peyton Place" in 1961 and also the remake of "State Fair" in 1962.

Ferrer's other notable film roles include the Turkish Bey in "Lawrence of Arabia" (1962), Herod Antipas in "The Greatest Story Ever Told" (1965), a budding Nazi in "Ship of Fools", a pompous professor in Woody Allen's "A Midsummer Night's Sex Comedy" (1982), the treacherous Professor Siletski in the 1983 remake of "To Be or Not to Be", and Padishah Emperor Shaddam IV in "Dune" in 1984. In an interview given in the 1980s, he bemoaned the lack of good character parts for aging stars, and admitted that he now took on roles mostly for the money, such as his roles in the horror potboilers "The Swarm", in which he played a doctor, and "Dracula's Dog", in which he played a police inspector.

In 1980, he had a role as future Justice Abe Fortas in the made-for-television film version of Anthony Lewis' "Gideon's Trumpet", opposite Henry Fonda in an Emmy-nominated performance as Clarence Earl Gideon.

Among other radio roles, Ferrer starred as detective Philo Vance in a 1945 series of the same name.

On May 8, 1958, Ferrer guest-starred on NBC's "The Ford Show, Starring Tennessee Ernie Ford."

Ferrer, not usually known for regular roles in TV series, had a recurring role as Julia Duffy's WASPy father in the long-running television series "Newhart" in the 1980s. He also had a recurring role as elegant and flamboyant attorney Reuben Marino in the soap opera "Another World" in the early 1980s. He narrated the very first episode of the popular 1964 sitcom "Bewitched", in mock documentary style. He also provided the voice of the evil Ben Haramed in the 1968 Rankin/Bass Christmas TV special "The Little Drummer Boy".
Ferrer would don the nose and costume of Cyrano for the last time in a TV commercial in the 1970s. During those years he guest-starred in several television series, such as "Quincy, M.E.", in which he played a doctor suspected of unethical behavior. In the third season of "Columbo", Ferrer starred in the episode "Mind over Mayhem" as the murderous head of a high-tech think tank. He was also in episode 8 of "Magnum, P.I." with his son Miguel in 1981. In 1986 he appeared in the two-part episode "The Don" in the TV series "Matlock".


Ferrer was married five times:


Ferrer died of colorectal cancer in Coral Gables, Florida, in 1992, shortly after his 80th birthday, and was interred in Santa María Magdalena de Pazzis Cemetery in Old San Juan in his native Puerto Rico.




</doc>
<doc id="16768" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16768" title="Kevin Spacey">
Kevin Spacey

Kevin Spacey Fowler, (born July 26, 1959) is an American actor, producer, and singer. He began his career as a stage actor during the 1980s before obtaining supporting roles in film and television. He gained critical acclaim in the early 1990s that culminated in his first Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor for the neo-noir crime thriller "The Usual Suspects" (1995), and an Academy Award for Best Actor for the midlife crisis-themed drama "American Beauty" (1999).

His other starring roles have included the comedy-drama film "Swimming with Sharks" (1994), the psychological thriller "Seven" (1995), the neo-noir crime film "L.A. Confidential" (1997), the drama "Pay It Forward" (2000), the science fiction-mystery film "K-PAX" (2001), the musical biopic "Beyond the Sea" (2004), the superhero film "Superman Returns" (2006), and the action film "Baby Driver" (2017).

In Broadway theatre, Spacey won a Tony Award in 1991 for his role in "Lost in Yonkers". In 2017, he hosted the 71st Tony Awards. He was the artistic director of the Old Vic theatre in London from 2004 until stepping down in mid-2015. From 2013 to 2017, Spacey played Frank Underwood in the Netflix political drama series "House of Cards". For his role as Underwood, he has won a Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Television Series Drama and two consecutive Screen Actors Guild Awards for Outstanding Performance by a Male Actor in a Drama Series.

In October 2017 Spacey was accused by actor Anthony Rapp of making a sexual advance toward him when Rapp was 14. Shortly after, numerous other men alleged that Spacey had sexually harassed or assaulted them. As a result, Netflix cut all ties with him, shelved his film "Gore" and removed him from the cast of the last season of "House of Cards". He was to appear in Ridley Scott's film "All the Money in the World" but all his scenes were cut from the film and Christopher Plummer replaced him in reshoots.

Spacey was born in South Orange, New Jersey, to Kathleen Ann ("née" Knutson), a secretary, and Thomas Geoffrey Fowler, a technical writer and data consultant. He has an older brother, Randy Fowler, who is a limo driver and Rod Stewart impersonator in Boise, Idaho, and a sister, Julie Ann Fowler Keir, an office worker. His family relocated to Southern California when Spacey was four years old. Randy Fowler (from whom Spacey is estranged) has stated that their father, whom he described as a racist "Nazi supporter", was sexually and physically abusive, and that Spacey had shut down emotionally and become "very sly and smart" to avoid whippings.

Spacey attended Northridge Military Academy, Canoga Park High School in the 10th and 11th grades. He graduated co-valedictorian (along with Mare Winningham) of the class of 1977 of Chatsworth High School in Chatsworth, California. At Chatsworth, Spacey starred in the school's senior production of "The Sound of Music", playing the part of Captain Georg von Trapp with Winningham as Maria von Trapp. He started using his middle name "Spacey", which is also his paternal grandmother's maiden name.

Spacey had tried to succeed as a comedian for several years before attending the Juilliard School in New York City, as a member of Group 12, where he studied drama between 1979 and 1981. During this time period, he performed stand-up comedy in bowling alley talent contests.

Spacey's first professional stage appearance was as a spear carrier in a New York Shakespeare Festival performance of "Henry VI, Part 1" in 1981. The following year, he made his first Broadway appearance, as Oswald in a production of Henrik Ibsen's "Ghosts", starring Liv Ullmann. Then he portrayed Philinte in Molière's "The Misanthrope". In 1984, he appeared in a production of David Rabe's "Hurlyburly", in which he rotated through each of the male parts (he would later play Mickey in the film version). Next came Anton Chekhov's "The Seagull". In 1986, he appeared in a production of "Sleuth" in a New Jersey dinner theatre.

His prominence as a stage actor began in 1986, when he was cast opposite Jack Lemmon, Peter Gallagher and Bethel Leslie as Jamie, the eldest Tyrone son in Jonathan Miller's lauded production of Eugene O'Neill's "Long Day's Journey into Night". Lemmon in particular would become a mentor to him and was invited, along with Spacey's high school drama teacher, to be present when Spacey received his star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame in 1999. He made his first major television appearance in the second-season premiere of "Crime Story", playing a Kennedy-esque American senator. Although his interest soon turned to film, Spacey remained actively involved in the live theater community. In 1991, he won a Tony Award for his portrayal of Uncle Louie in Neil Simon's Broadway hit "Lost in Yonkers". Spacey's father was unconvinced that Spacey could make a career for himself as an actor, and did not change his mind until Spacey became well-known.

Some of Spacey's early roles include a widowed eccentric millionaire on "L.A. Law", the television miniseries "The Murder of Mary Phagan" (1988), opposite Lemmon, and the comedy "See No Evil, Hear No Evil" (1989). He earned a fan base after playing the criminally insane arms dealer Mel Profitt on the television series "Wiseguy". He quickly developed a reputation as a character actor, and was cast in bigger roles, including one-half of a bickering Connecticut couple in the dark comedy film "The Ref" (1994), a malicious Hollywood studio boss in the satire "Swimming with Sharks", and the malevolent office manager in the ensemble film "Glengarry Glen Ross" (1992), gaining him positive notices by critics. His performance as the enigmatic criminal Verbal Kint in 1995's "The Usual Suspects" won him the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor.

Spacey appeared in the 1995 thriller film "Seven", making a sudden entrance late in the film as the serial killer John Doe after going unmentioned in the film's advertisements and opening credits. His work in "Seven", "The Usual Suspects", and "Outbreak" earned him Best Supporting Actor honors at the 1995 Society of Texas Film Critics Awards. He remarked in 2013: "I think people just like me evil for some reason. They want me to be a son of a bitch."
Spacey played an egomaniacal district attorney in "A Time to Kill" (1996), and founded Trigger Street Productions in 1997, with the purpose of producing and developing entertainment across various media. He made his directorial debut with the film "Albino Alligator" (1996). The film was a failure at the box office, grossing $339,379 with a budget of $6 million, but critics praised Spacey's direction. He also voiced Hopper in the animated film "A Bug's Life" (1998).

Spacey won universal praise and an Academy Award for Best Actor for his role as a depressed suburban father who re-evaluates his life in 1999's "American Beauty"; the same year, he was honored with a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame. Spacey won the Laurence Olivier Award for Best Actor and earned another Tony nomination in 1999 for "The Iceman Cometh". In 2001, Spacey co-hosted, with Judi Dench, the "Unite for the Future Gala", a UK fundraiser for the British victims of 9/11 and Médecins Sans Frontières at London's Old Vic Theatre, produced by Harvey Goldsmith and Dominic Madden.

He played a physically and emotionally scarred grade school teacher in "Pay It Forward" (2000), a patient in a mental institution who may or may not be an alien in "K-Pax" (2001), and singer Bobby Darin in "Beyond the Sea" (2004). The latter was a lifelong dream project for Spacey, who took on co-writing, directing, co-producing, and starring duties in the biography/musical about Darin's life, career, and relationship with actress Sandra Dee. Facing little interest for backing in the United States, Spacey went to the United Kingdom and Germany for funding. Almost all of the film was made in Berlin. Spacey provided his own vocals on the "Beyond the Sea" soundtrack and appeared in several tribute concerts around the time of the film's release. He received mostly positive reviews for his singing, as well as a Golden Globe nomination for his performance. However, reviewers criticized the age disparity between Spacey and Darin, noting that Spacey was too old to convincingly portray Darin, particularly during the early stages of the singer's life depicted in the film.
Spacey hosted "Saturday Night Live" twice: first in 1997 with musical guest Beck and special guests Michael Palin and John Cleese from "Monty Python's Flying Circus", and again in May 2006 with musical guest Nelly Furtado. In 2006, Spacey played Lex Luthor in the Bryan Singer superhero film "Superman Returns". He was to return for its 2009 sequel, but the series was instead rebooted with 2013 film "Man of Steel".

Spacey also appeared in "Edison", which received a direct-to-video release in 2006. In 2008, he played an MIT lecturer in the film "21". The film is based on Ben Mezrich's best seller "Bringing Down the House: The Inside Story of Six MIT Students Who Took Vegas for Millions", a story of student MIT card-counters who used mathematical probability to aid them in card games such as blackjack. In early 2010, Spacey went to China to star in writer-director Dayyan Eng's black comedy film "Inseparable", becoming the first Hollywood actor to star in a fully Chinese-funded film.

In September 2006, Spacey said that he intended to take up British citizenship when it is offered to him. When asked about the UK's referendum on whether or not to leave the European Union in 2016, Spacey replied "I appreciate you asking me the question, but I am not a British citizen, I am a resident of Great Britain. And I have never in my 12 years ever gotten involved in politics in Great Britain. I think it's inappropriate for me as a, really as a guest, in Great Britain, so I'll leave that to the British people." On June 16, 2016, Spacey was awarded an honorary knighthood for his services to theatre. The honor, Knight Commander of the Order of the British Empire, was given at Clarence House by Prince Charles. While Spacey will be permitted to add the post-nominal letters, KBE, to his name, as a non-British citizen the award is honorary and he will not be able to style himself as "Sir Kevin". Spacey had previously been awarded the lesser rank of honorary Commander of the Order of the British Empire for services to drama in 2010.

Spacey is well known in Hollywood for his impressions. When he appeared on "Inside the Actors Studio", he imitated (at host James Lipton's request) James Stewart, Johnny Carson, Katharine Hepburn, Clint Eastwood, John Gielgud, Marlon Brando, Christopher Walken, Al Pacino, and Jack Lemmon. As a young actor in New York City, he used his skill to pretend to be Carson's son to obtain free theater tickets and enter Studio 54.

Capitol/EMI's album "Forever Cool" (2007) features two duets with Spacey and an earlier recording of Dean Martin: "Ain't That a Kick in the Head" and "King of the Road". In December 2007, Spacey cohosted the Nobel Peace Prize Concert along with Uma Thurman.

Spacey is a patron of the Shakespeare Schools Festival, a charity that enables school children across the UK to perform Shakespeare in professional theatres. He also sits on the board of directors of the Motion Picture and Television Fund.

On March 18, 2011, it was announced that Spacey was cast as Frank Underwood in the Netflix series "House of Cards". He was nominated for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Drama Series at the 65th Primetime Emmy Awards in 2013 becoming the first lead actor to be Primetime Emmy nominated from a web television series. He went on to win the Golden Globe award for Best Actor in a Television Series Drama at the 72nd Golden Globe Awards and Screen Actors Guild nomination for Outstanding Performance by a Male Actor in a Drama Series at the 21st Screen Actors Guild Awards for his season 2 performance.

In July 2011, Spacey co-starred in the black comedy film "Horrible Bosses", which grossed over $209.6 million at the box office. He executive produced the biographical survival thriller film "Captain Phillips" in 2013, which was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Picture.

Spacey portrayed founder and president of the private military corporation Atlas Corporation, Jonathan Irons, in the 2014 video game "" through motion capture. Spacey starred as President Richard Nixon in the comedy-drama "Elvis & Nixon" (2016). The film is based on the meeting that took place between Nixon and singer Elvis Presley (Michael Shannon) in December 1970 wherein Presley requested Nixon swear him in as an undercover agent in the Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs. He next starred in the comedy film "Nine Lives", as a man trapped in the body of a cat. The film was released on August 5, 2016.

In March 2017, it was announced that Spacey would portray J. Paul Getty in Ridley Scott's "All the Money in the World". He shot his role in the film in 10 days over the summer of 2017. However, due to the sexual assault allegations against Spacey, the company announced on November 8, 2017 that all of his footage would be excised, and Christopher Plummer would replace Spacey as Getty in re-shoots. In spite of the very tight schedule, TriStar Pictures completed the new version of the film in time for a December 25 release.

In February 2003, Spacey announced that he was returning to London to become the artistic director of the Old Vic, one of the city's oldest theatres. Appearing at a press conference with Judi Dench and Elton John, he promised both to appear on stage and to bring in big-name talent. Spacey undertook to remain in the post for a full ten years. The Old Vic Theatre Company staged shows eight months out of the year. Spacey's first season started in September 2004, and opened with the British premiere of the play "Cloaca" by Maria Goos, directed by Spacey, which opened to mixed reviews. In the 2005 season, Spacey made his UK Shakespearean debut, to good notices, in the title role of "Richard II" directed by Trevor Nunn.

In mid-2006, Spacey said that he was having the time of his life working at the Old Vic; at that point in his career, he said, he was "trying to do things now that are much bigger and outside himself". He performed in productions of "National Anthems" by Dennis McIntyre, and "The Philadelphia Story" by Philip Barry in which he played C.K. Dexter Haven, the Cary Grant role in the film version. Critics applauded Spacey for taking on the management of a theatre, but noted that while his acting was impressive, his skills and judgment as a producer/manager had yet to develop.

In the 2006 season, Spacey suffered a major setback with a production of Arthur Miller's "Resurrection Blues", directed by Robert Altman. Despite an all-star cast (including Matthew Modine and future "House of Cards" co-star Neve Campbell) and the pedigree of Miller's script, Spacey's decision to lure Altman to the stage proved disastrous: after a fraught rehearsal period, the play opened to a critical panning, and closed after only a few weeks. Later in the year, Spacey starred in Eugene O'Neill's "A Moon for the Misbegotten", along with Colm Meaney and Eve Best. The play received excellent reviews for Spacey and Best, and was transferred to Broadway in 2007. For the spring part of the 2007–08 season, Jeff Goldblum and Laura Michelle Kelly joined Spacey as the three characters in David Mamet's 1988 play "Speed-the-Plow".

In 2009, he directed the premiere of Joe Sutton's "Complicit", with Richard Dreyfuss, David Suchet and Elizabeth McGovern. Later that year, Trevor Nunn directed Spacey in a revival of "Inherit the Wind". Spacey played defense lawyer Henry Drummond, a role that was made famous by Spencer Tracy in the 1960 film of the same name.

Sam Mendes directed Spacey in a Shakespeare's "Richard III"; Spacey played the title role. The show began in June 2011, commencing a worldwide tour culminating in New York in early 2012. In March 2014, it was announced that Spacey would star in a one-man play at the Old Vic to celebrate his 10 years as artistic director. He took on the part of Clarence Darrow in the play.

In January 2016 it was announced that Relativity Media, which was just emerging from Chapter 11 bankruptcy, had acquired Trigger Street Productions and that Spacey would become chairman of Relativity Studios whilst Dana Brunetti would become the studio's president. Spacey called the move "an incredible opportunity to make great entertainment" and said he considered it the "next evolution in my career". However, when the paperwork for the studio was filed for the court it emerged that Spacey had opted out of assuming the chairmanship of the studios, and by the end of 2016 Brunetti had also left Relativity whilst both remained Executive Producers on "House of Cards" and "".

Spacey's political views have been described as left-leaning and mirroring some of those possessed by his fictional character in "House of Cards". Spacey is a Democrat and a friend of President Bill Clinton. Having met the former U.S. President before his presidency began, Spacey once described Clinton as "one of a shining light" in the political process. He additionally made a cameo appearance in the short film "President Clinton: Final Days", a light-hearted political satire produced by the Clinton administration for the White House Correspondents Dinner.

Spacey met Venezuelan president Hugo Chávez in September 2007, and never spoke to the press about their encounter. During the trip, he donated money to the Venezuelan film studio Villa del Cine.

In March 2011 – following Belarusian president Alexander Lukashenko's crackdown on the Belarusian democracy movement – Spacey joined Jude Law on the street in a protest against Lukashenko's regime.

In 2018, Earl Blue, owner of the security company VIP Protective Services, accused Spacey of using racial slurs against his predominately African-American staff when they were hired on the "House of Cards" set in 2012.

On October 29, 2017, actor Anthony Rapp alleged that Spacey, apparently drunk, made a sexual advance toward him in 1986, when Rapp was 14. Spacey stated through Twitter that he did not remember the encounter, but that he owed Rapp "the sincerest apology for what would have been deeply inappropriate drunken behavior" if he had behaved as asserted.

Fifteen others came forward alleging similar abuse, including journalist Heather Unruh (who alleged that Spacey sexually assaulted her son), Norwegian author and Royal Family member Ari Behn, filmmaker Tony Montana, actor Roberto Cavazos, Richard Dreyfuss' son Harry, and eight people who worked on "House of Cards". An anonymous man alleged that he had an extended sexual relationship with Spacey in 1983, when he was 14 and Spacey was 24; the man said that the relationship ended with Spacey attempting to rape him. "The Guardian" was contacted by "a number of people" who worked at the Old Vic, where Spacey was artistic director for 11 years, alleging he "groped and behaved in an inappropriate way with young men at the time". On November 16, the Old Vic confirmed that it had received 20 testimonies of alleged inappropriate behavior by Spacey, with three stating they contacted the police. In December, Spacey's "Usual Suspects" costar Gabriel Byrne revealed that production on that film was shut down for two days because Spacey made unwanted sexual advances toward a younger actor.

In the midst of the allegations, filming of the sixth and final season of "House of Cards" was suspended. The show had been due to end in 2018. The season was shortened from 13 to 8 episodes and Spacey was removed from the cast. A Gore Vidal biopic starring Spacey, "Gore," set to be distributed by Netflix, was canceled; Netflix went on to sever all ties with him. Spacey was due to appear in Ridley Scott's biographical film "All the Money in the World" as industrialist J. Paul Getty; however, his scenes were cut and Christopher Plummer replaced him as Getty in reshoots. The International Academy of Television Arts and Sciences reversed its decision to honor Spacey with the 2017 International Emmy Founders Award.

On November 1, Spacey stated that he would be seeking "evaluation and treatment" for his behavior. The following day, "Variety" reported that the actor's publicist Staci Wolfe and talent agency CAA were ending their relationships with him.

In 1999, reports suggested Spacey was dating a script supervisor named Dianne Dreyer, with their relationship possibly dating back as far as 1992. In 2000, Spacey brought Dreyer to the Academy Awards; during the acceptance speech for his Best Actor award, Spacey stated, "Dianne, thank you for teaching me about caring about the right things, and I love you."

An article in "The Sunday Times Magazine" in 1999 stated that Spacey's "love affair with acting, and the absence of a visible partner in the life of an attractive 40-year-old, has resulted in "Esquire" magazine asserting two years ago that he must be gay." He responded to the rumors by telling "Playboy" and other interviewers that he was not gay, and telling Lesley White of "The Sunday Times":I chose for a long time not to answer these questions because of the manner in which they were asked, and because I was never talking to someone I trusted, so why should I? Recently I chose to participate because it's a little hard on the people I love.In 2007, "Gotham" magazine quoted Spacey saying:I've never believed in pimping my personal life out for publicity. Although I might be interested in doing it, I will never do it. People can gossip all they want; they can speculate all they want. I just happened to believe that there's a separation between the public life and the private life. Everybody has the right to a private life no matter what their professions are.

Spacey came out as gay in October 2017 when he apologized to Anthony Rapp, disclosing that "I have had relationships with both men and women. I have loved and had romantic encounters with men throughout my life, and I choose now to live as a gay man." His decision to come out via his statement was criticized by prominent members of the gay community, including Billy Eichner, George Takei and Wanda Sykes, as an attempt to change the subject from Rapp's accusation, for using his own drunkenness as an excuse, and for implying a connection between being gay and sexually assaulting a child.







</doc>
<doc id="12561" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12561" title="Gene Hackman">
Gene Hackman

Eugene Allen Hackman (born January 30, 1930) is a retired American actor and novelist. In a career that spanned nearly five decades, Hackman was nominated for five Academy Awards, winning Best Actor in "The French Connection" and Best Supporting Actor in "Unforgiven". He won three Golden Globes and two BAFTAs.

He first came to fame in 1967 with his performance as Buck Barrow in "Bonnie and Clyde", when he received his first Academy Award nomination for Best Supporting Actor. His major subsequent films include: "I Never Sang for My Father" (1970), when he received his second Best Supporting Actor nomination; "The French Connection" (1971) and "French Connection II" (1975), when he played Jimmy "Popeye" Doyle; "The Poseidon Adventure" (1972); "The Conversation" (1974); "Superman: The Movie" (1978), when he played arch-villain Lex Luthor; "Hoosiers" (1986); and "Mississippi Burning" (1988), when he received his second Best Actor nomination.

His film roles during the 1990s featured: "Unforgiven" (1992); "The Firm" (1993); "Crimson Tide" (1995); "Get Shorty" (1995); "The Birdcage" (1996); and "Enemy of the State" (1998) Later roles included: "Behind Enemy Lines" (2001); and "The Royal Tenenbaums" (2001). Hackman's final film appearance to date was the romantic comedy "Welcome to Mooseport" in 2004, co-starring comedian Ray Romano.

Hackman was born in San Bernardino, California, the son of Eugene Ezra Hackman and Anna Lyda Elizabeth (née Gray). He has one brother, Richard. He has Pennsylvania Dutch (German), English, and Scottish ancestry; his mother was born in Lambton, Ontario. According to a plaque in a city park, he worked for a time as a dog catcher for the local animal shelter. His family moved frequently, finally settling in Danville, Illinois, where they lived in the house of his English-born maternal grandmother, Beatrice. Hackman's father operated the printing press for the "Commercial-News", a local paper. As a teenager, Hackman knew Dick Van Dyke, who was friends with his older brother Richard. His parents divorced in 1943 and his father subsequently left the family.

Hackman lived briefly in Storm Lake, Iowa and spent his sophomore year at Storm Lake High School. He left home at age 16 and lied about his age to enlist in the United States Marine Corps. He served four and a half years as a field radio operator. He was stationed in China (Qingdao and later in Shanghai). When the Communist Revolution conquered the mainland in 1949, Hackman was assigned to Hawaii and Japan. Following his discharge in 1951, he moved to New York and worked in several jobs. His mother died in 1962 as a result of a fire she accidentally set while smoking.

In 1956, he began pursuing an acting career; he joined the Pasadena Playhouse in California. It was there that he forged a friendship with another aspiring actor, Dustin Hoffman. Already seen as outsiders by their classmates, they were later voted "The Least Likely To Succeed." Determined to prove them wrong, Hackman moved to New York City. A 2004 article in "Vanity Fair" described how Hackman, Hoffman and Robert Duvall were all struggling California born actors and close friends, sharing apartments in various two-person combinations while living in New York City in the 1960s. To support himself between acting jobs, he was working as a uniformed doorman at a Howard Johnson restaurant in New York when, as bad luck would have it, he ran into a despised Pasadena Playhouse instructor who once told him he was not good enough to be an actor. Reinforcing "The Least Likely To Succeed" vote, the man said to him, "See, Hackman, I told you you wouldn't amount to anything." From then on, Hackman was determined to become the finest actor he possibly could. The three former roommates have since earned 19 Academy Award nominations for acting, with five wins.

Hackman got various bit roles, for example on the TV series "Route 66" in 1963, and began performing in several Off-Broadway plays. In 1964, he had an offer to co-star in the play "Any Wednesday" with actress Sandy Dennis. This opened the door to film work. His first role was in "Lilith", with Warren Beatty in the leading role. In 1967, he appeared in an episode of the television series "The Invaders" entitled "The Spores". Another supporting role, Buck Barrow in 1967's "Bonnie and Clyde", earned him an Academy Award nomination as Best Supporting Actor. In 1968, he appeared in an episode of "I Spy", in the role of "Hunter", in the episode "Happy Birthday... Everybody". In 1968, he starred in the "CBS Playhouse" episode "My Father and My Mother" and the dystopian television film "Shadow on the Land". In 1969, he played a ski coach in "Downhill Racer" and an astronaut in "Marooned". Also that year, he played a member of a barnstorming skydiving team that entertained mostly at county fairs: "The Gypsy Moths". He nearly accepted the role of Mike Brady for the upcoming TV series, "The Brady Bunch", but was advised by his agent to decline in exchange for a more promising role, which he did.

In 1971, he was nominated for the Best Supporting Actor Academy Award again, this time for 1970's "I Never Sang for My Father", working alongside Melvyn Douglas and Estelle Parsons. The next year, he won the Academy Award for Best Actor for his performance as New York City Detective Jimmy "Popeye" Doyle in "The French Connection", marking his graduation to leading man status.

He followed this with leading roles in the disaster film "The Poseidon Adventure" (1972) and Francis Ford Coppola's "The Conversation" (1974), which was nominated for several Oscars. That same year, Hackman appeared in what became one of his most famous comedic roles as the blind hermit in "Young Frankenstein".

He later appeared as one of Teddy Roosevelt's former Rough Riders in the Western horse-race saga "Bite the Bullet" (1975), as well as in that year's sequel "French Connection II". In 1975 he also appeared in "Night Moves", receiving a BAFTA nomination for lead actor. He appeared in the star-studded war film "A Bridge Too Far" (1977), as Polish General Stanisław Sosabowski. Hackman showed a talent for both comedy and the "slow burn" as criminal mastermind Lex Luthor in "Superman: The Movie" (1978), as he would in its 1980 and 1987 sequels.

By the end of the 1980s, he alternated between leading and supporting roles, earning another Best Actor nomination for "Mississippi Burning". He had a memorable part as a Secretary of Defense trying to cover up a homicide in 1987's "No Way Out" opposite Kevin Costner.

During this decade, he also was in "Reds", "Under Fire", "Hoosiers", "Power", "Uncommon Valor" and "Bat*21". A 2008 American Film Institute poll voted "Hoosiers" the fourth-greatest film of all time in the sports genre.

In 1990, the actor underwent an angioplasty, which kept him from work for a while, although he found time for "Narrow Margin"—a remake of "The Narrow Margin" (1952). In 1992, he played the sadistic sheriff "Little" Bill Daggett in the western "Unforgiven" directed by Clint Eastwood and written by David Webb Peoples which earned him a second Oscar, this time for Best Supporting Actor. The film won Best Picture.
In 1993 he appeared in "" as Brigadier General George Crook. He co-starred with Tom Cruise as a corrupt lawyer in "The Firm" (1993) and appeared in a second John Grisham story in 1996, playing a convict on death row in "The Chamber".

In 1995, he played an inept Hollywood producer-director named Harry Zimm in "Get Shorty" and the villainous fast-draw champion John Herrod in "The Quick and the Dead" opposite Sharon Stone, Leonardo DiCaprio and Russell Crowe, as well as submarine Captain Frank Ramsey in the film "Crimson Tide" with Denzel Washington.

In 1996, he took a comedic turn as conservative Senator Kevin Keeley in "The Birdcage" with Robin Williams and Nathan Lane. He also co-starred with Will Smith in the 1998 film "Enemy of the State", where his character was reminiscent of the one from "The Conversation".

He played a U.S. president who is responsible for a killing in 1997's " Absolute Power", re-teaming with director-star Clint Eastwood.

Hackman starred in the David Mamet crime film "Heist", as an aging professional thief of considerable skill who is forced into one final job and the comedy "Heartbreakers" alongside Sigourney Weaver, Ray Liotta and Jennifer Love Hewitt. He had a small part as Arnold Margolese in Gore Verbinski's "The Mexican". He also had a leading role as the head of an eccentric family in the ensemble cast film "The Royal Tenenbaums" and in yet another Grisham legal drama, "Runaway Jury", at long last getting to make a picture with his longtime friend Dustin Hoffman. Hackman's final film to date was "Welcome to Mooseport" (2004), a comedy with Ray Romano, when he portrayed a former President of the United States.

In 2003 at the Golden Globes, Hackman was honored with the Cecil B. DeMille Award for his "outstanding contribution to the entertainment field."

On July 7, 2004, Hackman gave a rare interview to Larry King, where he announced that he had no future film projects lined up and believed his acting career was over. In 2008, while promoting his third novel, he confirmed that he had retired from acting. When asked during a "GQ" interview in 2011 if he would ever come out of retirement to do one more film, he said he might consider it "if I could do it in my own house, maybe, without them disturbing anything and just one or two people." In 2016 he narrated the Smithsonian Channel documentary "The Unknown Flag Raiser of Iwo Jima."

Together with undersea archaeologist Daniel Lenihan, Hackman has written three historical fiction novels: "Wake of the Perdido Star" (1999), a sea adventure of the 19th century; "Justice for None" (2004), a Depression-era tale of murder; and "Escape from Andersonville" (2008) about a prison escape during the Civil War. His first solo effort, a story of love and revenge set in the Old West titled "Payback at Morning Peak", was released in 2011. A police thriller, "Pursuit", followed in 2013.

In 2011, he appeared on the Fox Sports Radio show "The Loose Cannons", where he discussed his career and novels with Pat O'Brien, Steve Hartman, and Vic "The Brick" Jacobs.

Hackman's first marriage was to Faye Maltese. They had three children: Christopher Allen, Elizabeth Jean, and Leslie Anne Hackman. The couple divorced in 1986 after three decades of marriage. In 1991, he married Betsy Arakawa. They have a home in Santa Fe, New Mexico.

Hackman competed in Sports Car Club of America races driving an open wheeled Formula Ford in the late seventies. In 1983, he drove a Dan Gurney Team Toyota in the 24 Hours of Daytona Endurance Race. He also won the Long Beach Grand Prix Celebrity Race.

Hackman is an avid fan of the Jacksonville Jaguars and regularly attended Jaguars games as a guest of then-head coach Jack Del Rio. He is friends with Del Rio from Del Rio's playing days at the University of Southern California.

In January 2012, the then 81-year-old actor was riding a bicycle in the Florida Keys when he was struck by a car. Although it was at first reported that he had suffered head trauma, he sustained only minor injuries.





</doc>
<doc id="45782" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45782" title="Spencer Tracy">
Spencer Tracy

Spencer Bonaventure Tracy (April 5, 1900 – June 10, 1967) was an American actor, noted for his natural style and versatility. One of the major stars of Hollywood's Golden Age, Tracy won two Academy Awards for Best Actor, from nine nominations, sharing the record for nominations in that category with Laurence Olivier.

Tracy first discovered his talent for acting while attending Ripon College, and he later received a scholarship for the American Academy of Dramatic Arts. He spent seven years in the theatre, working in a succession of stock companies and intermittently on Broadway. Tracy's breakthrough came in 1930, when his lead performance in "The Last Mile" caught the attention of Hollywood. After a successful film debut in "Up the River", Tracy was signed to a contract with Fox Film Corporation. His five years with Fox were unremarkable, and he remained largely unknown to audiences after 25 films, most of them starring Tracy as the leading man. None of them were hits although "The Power and the Glory" (1933) features one of his most acclaimed performances.

In 1935, Tracy joined Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer, at the time Hollywood's most prestigious studio. His career flourished with a series of hit films, and in 1937 and 1938 he won consecutive Oscars for "Captains Courageous" and "Boys Town". By the 1940s, Tracy was one of the studio's top stars. In 1942, he appeared with Katharine Hepburn in "Woman of the Year", beginning a popular partnership that produced nine movies over 25 years. Tracy left MGM in 1955, and continued to work regularly as a freelance star, despite an increasing weariness as he aged. His personal life was troubled, with a lifelong struggle against alcoholism and guilt over his son's deafness. Tracy became estranged from his wife in the 1930s, but never divorced, conducting a long-term relationship with Katharine Hepburn in private. Towards the end of his life, Tracy worked almost exclusively for director Stanley Kramer. It was for Kramer that he made his last film, "Guess Who's Coming to Dinner" in 1967, completed just 17 days before Tracy's death.

During his career, Tracy appeared in 75 films and developed a reputation among his peers as one of the screen's greatest actors. In 1999 the American Film Institute ranked Tracy as the 9th greatest male star of Classic Hollywood Cinema.

Tracy was born on April 5, 1900, in Milwaukee, Wisconsin. He was the second son of Caroline (née Brown; 1874–1942) and John Edward Tracy (1873–1928), a truck salesman. His mother was a Presbyterian from a wealthy Midwestern family, and his father was of Irish Catholic background. His one brother, Carroll, was four years older.

Spencer was a difficult and hyperactive child  with poor school attendance. Raised as a Catholic, at nine years old he was placed in the care of Dominican nuns in the hope of transforming his behavior. Later in life he remarked, "I never would have gone back to school if there had been any other way of learning to read the subtitles in the movies." He became fascinated with motion pictures, watching the same ones repeatedly and then re-enacting scenes to his friends and neighbors. Tracy attended several Jesuit academies in his teenage years, which he claimed took the "badness" out of him and helped him improve his grades. At Marquette Academy he and lifelong friend, actor Pat O'Brien, began attending plays together, awakening Tracy's interest in the theatre.

With little care for his studies and "itching for a chance to go and see some excitement", Tracy and O'Brien enlisted in the United States Navy together, when Tracy turned 18. They were sent to the Naval Training Station in North Chicago, where they were still students when World War I came to an end. Tracy achieved the rank of seaman second class, but never went to sea, and was discharged in February 1919. John Tracy's desire to see one of his sons gain a college degree drove Tracy back to high school to finish his diploma. Studies at two more institutions, plus the additional allowance of "war credits", won Tracy a place at Ripon College. He entered Ripon in February 1921, declaring his intention to major in medicine.

Tracy was a popular student at Ripon, where he served as president of his hall and was involved in a number of college activities. He made his stage debut in June 1921, playing the male lead in "The Truth". Tracy was very well received in this role  and he quickly developed a passion for the stage. He formed an acting company with friends, which they called "The Campus Players" and took on tour. As a member of the college debate team, Tracy excelled in arguing and public speaking. It was during a tour with his debate team that Tracy auditioned for the American Academy of Dramatic Arts (AADA) in New York City. He was offered a scholarship to attend the school after performing a scene from one of his earlier roles.

Tracy left Ripon, and began classes at AADA in April 1922. Pat O'Brien was also enrolled there and the two shared a room. Tracy was deemed fit to progress to the senior class, allowing him to join the academy stock company. Tracy made his New York debut in October 1922, in a play called "The Wedding Guests", and then his Broadway debut three months later playing a wordless robot in "R.U.R." He graduated from AADA in March 1923.

Immediately following graduation, Tracy joined a new stock company based in White Plains, New York where he was given peripheral roles. Unhappy there, he moved to a company in Cincinnati, but failed to make an impact. In November 1923 he landed a small part on Broadway in the comedy "A Royal Fandango", starring Ethel Barrymore. Reviews for the show were poor and it closed after 25 performances; Tracy later said of the failure, "My ego took an awful beating." When he took a position with a struggling company in New Jersey, Tracy was living on an allowance of 35 cents a day. In January 1924 he played his first leading role with a company in Winnipeg, but the organization soon closed.

Tracy finally achieved some success by joining forces with the notable stock manager William H. Wright in the spring of 1924. A stage partnership was formed with the young actress Selena Royle, who had already made her name on Broadway. It proved a popular draw and their productions were favorably received. One of these shows brought Tracy to the attention of a Broadway producer, who offered him the lead in a new play. "The Sheepman" previewed in October 1925, but it received poor reviews and closed after its trial run in Connecticut. Dejected, Tracy was forced back to Wright and the stock circuit.

In the fall of 1926, Tracy was offered his third shot at Broadway: a role in a new George M. Cohan play called "Yellow". Tracy swore that if the play failed to be a hit he would leave stock and work in a "regular" business instead. Tracy was nervous about working with Cohan—one of the most important figures in American theatre—but during rehearsals Cohan announced, "Tracy, you're the best goddamned actor I've ever seen!" "Yellow" opened on September 21; reviews were mixed but it ran for 135 performances. It was the beginning of an important collaboration for Tracy: "I'd have quit the stage completely," he later commented, "if it hadn't been for George M. Cohan." Cohan wrote a part specifically for Tracy in his next play, "The Baby Cyclone". It opened on Broadway in September 1927 and proved to be a hit.

Tracy followed this success with another Cohan play, "Whispering Friends", and in 1929 took over from Clark Gable in "Conflict", a Broadway drama . A variety of other roles followed, but it was the lead in "Dread", written by Pulitzer Prize-winning dramatist Owen Davis that gave Tracy high hopes for success. The story of a man's descent into madness, "Dread" previewed in Brooklyn to an excellent reception, but the very next day—October 29—the New York stock market crashed. Unable to obtain funding, "Dread" did not open on Broadway. Following this disappointment, Tracy considered leaving the theatre and returning to Milwaukee for a more stable life.

In January 1930, Tracy was approached about a new play called "The Last Mile". Looking to cast the lead role of a murderer on death row, producer Herman Shumlin met with Tracy, and later recounted: "beneath the surface, here was a man of passion, violence, sensitivity and desperation: no ordinary man, and just the man for the part." "The Last Mile" opened on Broadway in February, where Tracy's performance was met by a standing ovation that lasted 14 curtain calls. The "Commonweal" described him as "one of our best and most versatile young actors". The play was a hit with critics, and ran for 289 performances.

In 1930, Broadway was being heavily scouted for actors to work in the "talkies", the new medium of sound film. Tracy was cast in two Vitaphone short movies ("Taxi Talks" and "The Hard Guy"), but he had not considered becoming a film actor: "I had no ambition in that direction and I was perfectly happy on the stage", he later explained in an interview. One of the scouts who saw Tracy in "The Last Mile" was director John Ford. Ford wanted Tracy for the lead role in his next picture, a prison movie. Production company Fox Film Corporation were unsure about Tracy, saying that he did not photograph well, but Ford convinced them that he was right for the role. "Up the River" (1930) marked the film debut of both Tracy and Humphrey Bogart. After seeing the rushes, Fox immediately offered Tracy a long-term contract. Knowing that he needed the money for his family—his young son was deaf and recovering from polio—Tracy signed with Fox and moved to California. He appeared on the stage again only once more in his life.

Winfield Sheehan, the head of Fox, committed to making Tracy a bankable commodity. The studio went to efforts to promote the actor, releasing adverts for his second film "Quick Millions" (1931) with the headline "A New Star Shines." Three films were made in quick succession, all of which were unsuccessful at the box office. Tracy found himself typecast in comedies, usually playing a crook or a con man. The mold was broken with his seventh picture, "Disorderly Conduct" (1932), and it was the first of his films since "Up the River" to make a profit.

In mid-1932, after nine pictures, Tracy remained virtually unknown to the public. He considered leaving Fox once his contract was up for renewal, but a rise in his weekly rate to $1,500 convinced him to stay. He continued to appear in unpopular films, with "Me and My Gal" (1932) setting an all-time low attendance record for the Roxy Theatre in New York City. He was loaned to Warner Bros. for "20,000 Years in Sing Sing" (1932), a prison drama co-starring Bette Davis. Tracy was hopeful that it would be his break-out role, but despite good reviews this failed to materialize.

Critics began to notice Tracy with "The Power and the Glory" (1933). The story of a man's rise to prosperity, written by Preston Sturges, Tracy's performance as railroad tycoon Tom Garner received uniformly strong reviews. William Wilkerson of "The Hollywood Reporter" wrote: "This sterling performer has finally been given an opportunity to show an ability that has been boxed in by gangster roles ... [the film] has introduced Mr. Tracy as one of the screen's best performers". Mordaunt Hall of "The New York Times" stated: "No more convincing performance has been given on the screen than Spencer Tracy's impersonation of Tom Garner." "Shanghai Madness" (1933), meanwhile, gave Tracy a previously unseen sex appeal and served to advance his standing. Despite this attention, Tracy's next two movies went largely unnoticed. "Man's Castle" (1933) with Loretta Young was anticipated to be a hit, but made only a small profit. "The Show-Off" (1934), for which he was lent to Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer, proved popular, but his subsequent outings continued to be unsuccessful.

Tracy drank heavily during his years with Fox, and gained a reputation as an alcoholic. He failed to report for filming on "Marie Galante" in June 1934, and was found in his hotel room, virtually unconscious after a two-week binge. Tracy was removed from the Fox payroll while he recovered in a hospital, and then sued for $125,000 for delaying the production. He completed only two more pictures with the studio.

The details on how Tracy's relationship with Fox ended are unclear: later in life Tracy maintained that he was fired for his drunken behavior, but the Fox records do not support such an account. He was still under contract with the studio when MGM expressed their interest in the actor. They were in need of a new male star, and contacted Tracy on April 2, 1935, offering him a seven-year deal. That afternoon, the contract between Tracy and Fox was terminated "by mutual consent". Tracy made a total of 25 pictures in the five years he was with Fox Film Corporation, most of which lost money at the box office.

In the 1930s, Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer was the most respected movie production studio in Hollywood. When Tracy arrived there, his own reputation was not strong. Biographer James Curtis writes: "Tracy was scarcely a blip on the box office barometer in 1935, a critics' darling and little more". He was, however, well known for being a troublemaker. Producer Irving G. Thalberg was nevertheless enthusiastic about working with the actor, telling journalist Louella Parsons: "Spencer Tracy will become one of MGM's most valuable stars."

Curtis notes that the studio managed Tracy with care, a welcome change from the ineptitude he had known at Fox, which was like "a shot of adrenaline" for the actor. His first film under the new contract was the quickly produced "The Murder Man" (1935), which included the feature film debut of James Stewart. Thalberg then began a strategy of pairing Tracy with the studio's top actresses: "Whipsaw" (1935) co-starred Myrna Loy and was a commercial success. "Riffraff" (1936) put Tracy opposite Jean Harlow. Both films were, however, designed and promoted to showcase their leading ladies, thus continuing Tracy's reputation as a secondary star.

"Fury" (1936) was the first film to prove that Tracy could make a success on his own merit. Directed by Fritz Lang, Tracy played a man who swears revenge after narrowly escaping death by a lynch mob. The film and performance received excellent reviews. It was popular with the public, going on to make $1.3 million worldwide. Curtis writes: "audiences who, just a year earlier, had no clear handle on him, were suddenly turning out to see him. It was a transition that was nothing short of miraculous ... [and showed] a willingness on the part of the public to embrace a leading man who was not textbook handsome nor bigger than life."

"Fury" was followed one month later with the release of the big-budget disaster movie "San Francisco" (1936). Tracy played a supporting role alongside Clark Gable in the film, allowing audiences to see him with the top male star in Hollywood. Taking on the role of a priest, Tracy reportedly felt a heavy responsibility in representing the church. Despite having only 17 minutes of screen time, Tracy was highly praised for his performance and received an Oscar nomination for Best Actor. "San Francisco" became the highest grossing picture of 1936. Donald Deschner, in his book on Tracy, credits "Fury" and "San Francisco" as the "two films that changed his career and gave him the status of a major star."

By this point, Tracy entered a period of self-imposed sobriety and MGM expressed pleasure with Tracy's professionalism. His public reputation continued to grow with "Libeled Lady" (1936), a screwball comedy that cast him with William Powell, Loy and Harlow. According to Curtis, "Powell, Harlow and Loy were among the biggest draws in the industry, and equal billing in such a powerhouse company could only serve to advance Tracy's standing". "Libeled Lady" was his third hit picture in the space of six months.

Tracy appeared in four movies in 1937. "They Gave Him a Gun" went largely unnoticed, but "Captains Courageous" was one of the major film events of the year. Tracy played a Portuguese fisherman in the adventure movie, based on the novel by Rudyard Kipling. He was uncomfortable feigning a foreign accent, and resented having his hair curled, but the role was a hit with audiences and Tracy won the Academy Award for Best Actor. "Captains Courageous" was followed by "Big City" with Luise Rainer and "Mannequin" with Joan Crawford, the latter of which took good billings at the box office. With two years of hit movies and industry recognition, Tracy became a star in the United States. A 1937 poll of 20 million people to find the "King and Queen of Hollywood" ranked Tracy sixth among males. Tracy was reunited with Gable and Loy for 1938's "Test Pilot". The film was another commercial and critical success, permanently cementing the notion of Gable and Tracy as a team.

Based on the positive response he had received in "San Francisco", MGM again cast Tracy as a priest in "Boys Town" (1938). Portraying Edward J. Flanagan, a Catholic priest and founder of Boys Town, was a role Tracy took seriously: "I'm so anxious to do a good job as Father Flanagan that it worries me, keeps me awake at night." Tracy received strong reviews for his performance, and the movie grossed $4 million worldwide. For the second year running, Tracy received an Academy Award for Best Actor. He was humble about the recognition, saying in his acceptance speech: "I honestly do not feel that I can accept this award ... I can accept it only as it was meant to be for a great man—Father Flanagan". He immediately sent the Academy Award statuette to Flanagan. Tracy was listed as the fifth biggest money-making star of 1938.

Tracy was absent from screens for almost a year before returning to Twentieth Century-Fox on loan and appearing as Henry M. Stanley in "Stanley and Livingstone", his only film of 1939. Curtis maintains that Tracy's non-visibility did little to affect his standing with the public or exhibitors. In October of that year, a "Fortune" magazine survey to find the nation's favorite movie actor listed Tracy in first place.

MGM capitalized on Tracy's popularity, casting him in four movies for 1940. "I Take This Woman" with Hedy Lamarr was a critical and commercial failure, but the historical drama "Northwest Passage"—Tracy's first film in Technicolor—proved popular. He then portrayed Thomas Edison in "Edison, the Man". Howard Barnes of the "New York Herald Tribune" was not charmed by the story, but wrote that Tracy, "by sheer persuasion of his acting", made the film worthy. "Boom Town" was the third and final Gable-Tracy picture, also featuring Claudette Colbert and Hedy Lamarr, making it one of the most anticipated films of the year. The film opened to the biggest crowd since "Gone With the Wind".

Tracy signed a new contract with MGM in April 1941, which paid $5,000 a week and limited him to three pictures a year (Tracy had previously expressed a need to reduce his workload). The contract also stated for the first time that his billing was to be "that of a star". Contrary to popular belief, the contract did not include a clause that he receive top billing, but from this point onward, every film Tracy appeared in featured his name in pole position.

In 1941, Tracy returned to the role of Father Flanagan in "Men of Boys Town". It was followed later that year by Tracy's only venture into the horror genre, an adaptation of "Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde", co-starring Ingrid Bergman and Lana Turner. Tracy was unhappy with the film, disliking the heavy make-up he needed to portray Hyde. Critical response to the film was mixed. Theodore Strauss of "The New York Times" wrote that "Mr. Tracy's portrait of Hyde is not so much evil incarnate as it is the ham rampant." The film was popular with audiences, however, taking in more than $2 million at the box office.

Tracy was set to star in a film version of "The Yearling" for 1942, but on-set difficulties and bad weather forced the production to close. With the end of that project, he became available for the new Katharine Hepburn movie, "Woman of the Year" (1942). Hepburn greatly admired Tracy, calling him "the best movie actor there was". She had wanted him for her comeback vehicle, "The Philadelphia Story" (1940). Hepburn was delighted that Tracy was available for "Woman of the Year", saying "I was just damned grateful he was willing to work with me." The romantic comedy performed well at the box office and received strong reviews. William Boehnel wrote in the "New York World-Telegram", "To begin with, it has Katharine Hepburn and Spencer Tracy in the leading roles. This in itself would be enough to make any film memorable. But when you get Tracy and Hepburn turning in brilliant performances to boot, you've got something to cheer about."

"Woman of the Year" was followed by an adaptation of John Steinbeck's "Tortilla Flat" (1942) which met with a tepid response. MGM did not hesitate to repeat the teaming of Tracy and Hepburn and cast them in the dark mystery "Keeper of the Flame" (1942). Despite a weak critical reception the film was a popular success, outgrossing its predecessor and confirming the strength of the partnership.

Tracy's next three appearances were all war-based. "A Guy Named Joe" (1943) with Irene Dunne surpassed "San Francisco" to become his highest-grossing film to date. "The Seventh Cross" (1944), about an escape from a Nazi concentration camp, met with critical acclaim. It was followed by the aviation film "Thirty Seconds Over Tokyo" (1944). On the strength of these three releases, the annual Quigley poll revealed Tracy was MGM's biggest money-making star of 1944. His only film the following year was "Without Love" (1945), a third film with Hepburn that performed well at the box office despite muted enthusiasm from critics.

In 1945, Tracy returned to the stage for the first time in 15 years. He had been through a dark patch personally—culminating with a stay in hospital—and Hepburn felt that a play would help restore his focus. Tracy told a journalist in April, "I'm coming back to Broadway to see if I can still act." The play was "The Rugged Path" by Robert E. Sherwood. It first previewed in Providence on September 28, to a sold out crowd and tepid response. It was a difficult production; director Garson Kanin later wrote: "In the ten days prior to the New York opening all the important relationships had deteriorated. Spencer was tense and unbending, could not, or would not, take direction". Tracy considered leaving the show before it even opened on Broadway, and lasted there just six weeks before announcing his intention to close the show. It closed on January 19, 1946, after 81 performances. Tracy later explained to a friend: "I couldn't say those goddamn lines over and over and over again every night ... At least every day is a new day for me in films ... But this thing—every day, every day, over and over again."

Tracy was absent from screens in 1946, the first year since his motion picture debut that there was no Spencer Tracy release. His next film was "The Sea of Grass" (1947) a drama set in the American Old West with Hepburn. Similarly to "Keeper of the Flame" and "Without Love", a lukewarm response from critics did not stop it from being a financial success both at home and abroad. He followed it later that year with "Cass Timberlane", in which he played a judge. It was a commercial success, but Curtis notes that co-star Lana Turner overshadowed Tracy in most of the reviews.

A fifth film with Hepburn came in 1948, Frank Capra's political drama "State of the Union". Tracy played a presidential candidate in the movie, which was warmly received. He then appeared in "Edward, My Son" (1949) with Deborah Kerr. Tracy disliked the role, and told director George Cukor, "It's rather disconcerting to me to find how easily I play a heel." Upon its release, "The New Yorker" wrote of the "hopeless miscasting of Mr. Tracy". The film became Tracy's biggest money-loser at MGM.

Tracy finished off the 1940s with "Malaya" (1949), an adventure film with James Stewart, and "Adam's Rib" (1949), a comedy with Tracy and Hepburn playing married lawyers who oppose each other in court. Tracy and Hepburn's friends, Garson Kanin and Ruth Gordon, wrote the parts specifically for the duo. The film received strong reviews and became the highest grossing Tracy-Hepburn picture to date. Film critic Bosley Crowther wrote, "Mr. Tracy and Miss Hepburn are the stellar performers in this show and their perfect compatibility in comic capers is delightful to see."

Tracy received his first Academy Award nomination in 12 years for playing the role of Stanley Banks in "Father of the Bride" (1950). In the comedy film, Banks attempts to handle preparations for his daughter's (played by Elizabeth Taylor) upcoming wedding. "It's the second strong comedy in a row for Spencer Tracy, doing the title role, and he socks it", "Variety" noted. The film was the biggest commercial success of Tracy's career to date, earning $6 million worldwide. MGM wanted a sequel, and while Tracy was unsure, he accepted. "Father's Little Dividend" (1951) was released ten months later and performed well at the box office. On the strength of the two movies, Tracy polled as one of the nation's top stars once again.

In 1951, Tracy portrayed a lawyer in "The People Against O'Hara". The next year he re-teamed with Hepburn for the sports comedy "Pat and Mike" (1952), the second feature written expressly for the pair by Kanin and Gordon. "Pat and Mike" became one of the duo's most popular and critically acclaimed films. Tracy followed it with "Plymouth Adventure" (1952), a historical drama set abroad the "Mayflower", co-starring Gene Tierney. It met with a poor response and posted a loss of $1.8 million. In 1953, Tracy returned to the role of a concerned father in "The Actress". "That film ... got more [acclaim] from the critics than any film I ever made in all the years, and we didn't make enough to pay for the ushers in the theatre," recalled producer Lawrence Weingarten. For his performance in "The Actress", Tracy won a Golden Globe Award and received a nomination for the British Academy Film Award (BAFTA) .

MGM lent Tracy to Twentieth Century-Fox for the Western film "Broken Lance", his only appearance of 1954. The picture was well received. In 1955 Tracy turned down William Wyler's "The Desperate Hours" because he refused to take second-billing to Humphrey Bogart. Instead, Tracy appeared as a one-armed protagonist who faces the hostility of a small town in "Bad Day at Black Rock" (1955), a film directed by John Sturges. For his work, Tracy received a fifth Oscar nomination and was awarded the Best Actor prize at the Cannes Film Festival. He had personally been unhappy with the picture, and threatened to leave it during production. This behavior became a regular occurrence for the aging Tracy, who was increasingly lethargic and cynical. He began production on "Tribute to a Bad Man" in the summer of 1955, but pulled out when he said that the shooting location in Colorado gave him altitude sickness. The problems caused by the picture fractured Tracy's relationship with MGM. In June 1955, he was the last remaining star of the studio's heyday, but with his contract up for renewal—Tracy opted to go independent for the first time in his movie career.

Tracy's first post-MGM appearance was in "The Mountain" (1956) with Robert Wagner, who played his much younger brother (Wagner had earlier played his son in "Broken Lance"). The location filming in the French Alps proved a difficult experience, and he threatened to leave the project. His performance earned a BAFTA nomination for Best Foreign Actor. Tracy and Hepburn then paired together for the eighth time in the office-based comedy "Desk Set" (1957). He again had to be convinced to stay with the film which met with a weak response.

In 1958, Tracy appeared in "The Old Man and the Sea", a project that had been in development for five years. An adaptation of Ernest Hemingway's novella of the same name, Hemingway's agent, Leland Hayward, had previously written to the author: "Of all Hollywood people, the one that comes the closest to me in quality, in personality and voice, in personal dignity and ability, is Spencer Tracy." Tracy was delighted to be offered the role. He was told to lose some of his 210 pounds before filming began, but failed to do so. Hemingway thus reported that Tracy was a "terrible liability to the picture", and had to be reassured that the star was being carefully photographed to disguise his weight. Appearing alone on screen for most of the film, Tracy considered "The Old Man and the Sea" the toughest part he ever played. In reviewing the performance, Jack Moffitt of "The Hollywood Reporter" said it was "so intimate and revealing of universal human experience that, to me, it almost transcended acting and became reality." Tracy received Oscar and BAFTA Award nominations for the work.

After abandoning two projects, including a proposed remake of "The Blue Angel" with Marilyn Monroe, Tracy's next feature was "The Last Hurrah" (1958). It reunited him with his debut director, John Ford, after 28 years. Tracy took a year to commit to the project, in which he played an Irish-American mayor seeking re-election. The movie was favorably reviewed, but not commercially successful. At the end of 1958, the National Board of Review named Tracy the year's Best Actor. He nevertheless began to ponder retirement, with Curtis writing that he was "chronically tired, unhappy, ill, and uninterested in work."

Tracy did not appear on the screen again until October 1960, with the release of "Inherit the Wind", a film based on the 1925 Scopes "Monkey Trial" which debated the right to teach evolution in schools. Director Stanley Kramer sought Tracy for the role of lawyer Clarence Darrow from the outset. Starring opposite Tracy was Fredric March, a pairing "Variety" described as "a stroke of casting genius ... Both men are spellbinders in the most laudatory sense of the word." The film garnered Tracy some of the strongest reviews of his career—he was nominated for an Academy Award, BAFTA Award and Golden Globe Award for the performance—but it was not a commercial hit.

In the volcano disaster movie "The Devil at 4 O'Clock" (1961), Tracy played a priest for the fourth time in his career. His co-star, Frank Sinatra, ceded top-billing to guarantee Tracy for the picture. Continuing his pattern of indecisiveness, Tracy briefly pulled out of the production before recommitting. Critics were unenthusiastic about the film, which was nevertheless Tracy's most successful box office outing since "Father of the Bride".

"Inherit the Wind" began an enduring collaboration between Stanley Kramer and Tracy—Kramer directed Tracy's three final films. "Judgment at Nuremberg", released at the end of 1961, was their second feature together. The film depicts the "Judges' Trial", the trial of Nazi judges for their role in the Holocaust. Abby Mann wrote the role of Judge Haywood with Tracy in mind; Tracy called it the best script he had ever read. At the end of the film, Tracy delivered a 13-minute speech. He recorded it in one take, and received a round of applause from the cast and crew. Upon seeing the film, Mann wrote to Tracy: "Every writer ought to have the experience of having Spencer Tracy do his lines. There is nothing in the world quite like it." The film met with positive reviews and a large audience; Tracy received an eighth Oscar nomination for his performance.

Tracy turned down roles in "Long Day's Journey into Night" (1962) and "The Leopard" (1963), and had to pull out of MGM's all-star "How the West Was Won" (1962) when it clashed with "Judgment at Nuremberg". He was, however, able to record the film's narration track. Tracy was in very poor health by this time, and working became a challenge. In 1962, he took the role of Captain T. G. Culpeper in Kramer's comedy "It's a Mad, Mad, Mad, Mad World" (1963), a small but key part that he was able to complete in nine days. Tracy's name topped the list of performers, and the comedy became the highest grossing American film of the year. As his health worsened, he had to cancel commitments to "Cheyenne Autumn" (1964) and "The Cincinnati Kid" (1965). Offers continued to come, but Tracy did not work again for the next five years until 1967 when he took the starring role in Kramer's "Guess Who's Coming to Dinner" (1967), Tracy's ninth and final film with Hepburn.

"Guess Who's Coming to Dinner" explored the topic of interracial marriage, with Tracy playing a liberal-minded newspaper publisher whose values are challenged when his daughter wishes to marry a black man, played by Sidney Poitier. Tracy was happy to be working again, but he told the press the movie would be his last. To commence filming, Tracy had to be insured for the high premium of $71,000; Hepburn and Kramer both put their salaries in escrow until Tracy completed his scenes. In poor health, Tracy could only work for two or three hours each day. He completed his last scene on May 24, 1967. Tracy died 17 days later from a heart attack on June 10.

The film was released in December, and although reviews were mixed, Curtis notes that "Tracy's performance was singled out for praise in nearly every instance." Brendan Gill of "The New Yorker" wrote that Tracy gave "a faultless and, under the circumstances, heartbreaking performance." The movie became Tracy's highest grossing picture. He received a posthumous nomination for Best Actor—his ninth—at the 40th Academy Awards, along with a Golden Globe Award nomination and a BAFTA win for Best Actor.

Tracy met actress Louise Treadwell while they were both members of the Wood Players in White Plains, New York—the first stock company Tracy joined after graduating. The couple were engaged in May 1923, and married on September 10 of that year between the matinee and evening performances of his show.

Their son, John Ten Broeck Tracy, was born in June 1924. When John was 10 months old, Louise discovered that the boy was deaf. She resisted telling Tracy for three months. Tracy was devastated by the news and felt a lifelong guilt over his son's deafness. He was convinced that John's hearing impairment was a punishment for his own sins. As a result, Tracy had trouble connecting with his son and distanced himself from his family. Joseph L. Mankiewicz, a friend of Tracy's, later theorized: "[Tracy] didn't leave Louise. He left the scene of his guilt." A second child, Louise "Susie" Treadwell Tracy, was born in July 1932. The children were raised in their mother's Episcopalian faith.

Tracy left the family home in 1933, and he and Louise openly discussed the separation with the media, maintaining that they were still friends and had not taken divorce action. From September 1933 to June 1934, Tracy had a public affair with Loretta Young, his co-star in "Man's Castle". He reconciled with Louise in 1935. There was never again an official separation between Tracy and his wife, but the marriage continued to be troubled. Tracy increasingly lived in hotels and by the 1940s, the two were effectively living separate lives. Tracy frequently engaged in extramarital affairs, including with co-stars Joan Crawford in 1937 and Ingrid Bergman in 1941.

While making "Woman of the Year" in September 1941, Tracy began what was to become a lifelong relationship with Katharine Hepburn. The actress became devoted to him, and their relationship lasted until his death 26 years later. Tracy never returned to live in the family home, although he visited regularly.

The MGM moguls were careful to protect their contract big stars from controversy, and Tracy wished to conceal his relationship with Hepburn from his wife, so it was hidden from the public. The couple did not live together until the final years of Tracy's life, when they shared a cottage on George Cukor's estate in Beverly Hills. In Hollywood, however, the intimate nature of the Tracy-Hepburn partnership was an open secret. Angela Lansbury, who worked with the pair on "State of the Union", later said: "We all knew, but nobody ever said anything. In those days it wasn't discussed." Tracy was not someone to express his emotions, but friend Betsy Drake believed he "was "utterly" dependent upon Hepburn." Tracy's infidelity apparently continued, however, and he is reported to have had an affair with Gene Tierney during the making of "Plymouth Adventure" in 1952.

Neither Tracy nor his wife ever pursued a divorce, despite their estrangement. He told Joan Fontaine, "I can get a divorce whenever I want to, but my wife and Kate like things just as they are." Louise, meanwhile, reportedly commented: "I will be Mrs. Spencer Tracy until the day I die." Hepburn did not interfere and never fought for marriage.

Tracy was an avowed Catholic, but his cousin, Jane Feely, said that he did not devoutly follow the religion: "he was often not a practical Catholic either. I would call him a spiritual Catholic." Garson Kanin, a friend of Tracy's for 25 years, described him as "a true believer" who respected his religion. At periods in his life, Tracy attended Mass regularly. Tracy did not believe actors should publicize their political views, but in 1940 lent his name to the "Hollywood for Roosevelt" committee and personally identified as a Democrat.

Tracy struggled with alcoholism throughout his adult life, an ailment that ran in his father's side of the family. Rather than being a steady drinker, as commonly thought, he was prone to periods of binging on alcohol. Loretta Young remarked that Tracy was "awful" when he was drunk, and he was twice arrested for his behavior while intoxicated. Because of this bad reaction to alcohol, Tracy regularly embarked on prolonged periods of sobriety, and developed an all-or-nothing routine. Hepburn commented that he could stop drinking for "months, even years at a time".

Tracy was prone to bouts of depression and anxiety: he was described by Mrs. Tracy as having "the most volatile disposition I've ever seen—up in the clouds one minute and down in the depths the next. And when he's low, he's very, very low." He was plagued by insomnia throughout his life. As a result, Tracy became dependent on barbiturates to sleep, followed by dexedrine to function. Hepburn, who adopted a nursing role towards Tracy, was unable to understand her partner's unhappiness. She wrote in her autobiography: "What was it? ... Never at peace ... Tortured by some sort of guilt. Some terrible misery."

As he entered his sixties, years of drinking, smoking, taking pills, and being overweight left Tracy in poor health. On July 21, 1963, he was hospitalized after a severe attack of breathlessness. Doctors found that he was suffering from pulmonary edema, where fluid accumulates in the lungs due to an inability of the heart to pump properly. They also declared his blood pressure as dangerously high. From this point on Tracy remained very weak, and Hepburn moved into his home to provide constant care. In January 1965, he was diagnosed with hypertensive heart disease and also began treatment for a previously ignored diagnosis of type 2 diabetes. Tracy almost died in September 1965: a stay in the hospital following a prostatectomy resulted in his kidneys failing, and he spent the night in a coma. His recovery was described by his doctor as "a kind of miracle".

Tracy spent most of the next two years at home with Hepburn, living what she described as a quiet life: reading, painting, and listening to music. On June 10, 1967, 17 days after completing what was his last film role in "Guess Who's Coming to Dinner", Tracy awakened at 3:00 am to make himself a cup of tea in his apartment in Beverly Hills, California. Hepburn described in her autobiography how she followed him to the kitchen: "Just as I was about to give [the door] a push, there was a sound of a cup smashing to the floor—then clump—a loud clump." She entered the room to find Tracy lying dead from a heart attack. He was 67. Hepburn recalled, "He looked so happy to be done with living, which for all his accomplishments had been a frightful burden for him." MGM publicist Howard Strickling told the media that Tracy had been alone when he died and was found by his housekeeper.

A Requiem Mass was held for Tracy on June 12 at the Immaculate Heart of Mary Catholic Church in East Hollywood. Active pallbearers included George Cukor, Stanley Kramer, Frank Sinatra, James Stewart, and John Ford. Out of consideration for Tracy's family, Hepburn did not attend the funeral. Tracy is interred at Glendale's Forest Lawn Memorial Park, near his wife, Louise and son, John.

Tracy had a high reputation among his peers and received considerable praise from the film industry. After his death, Dore Schary, head of Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer, said, "There can be no question that he was the best and most protean actor of our screen." Humphrey Bogart, Clark Gable, James Cagney, John Ford, Garson Kanin and Katharine Hepburn also called Tracy the greatest actor of his generation. Richard Widmark, who idolized Tracy, said: "He's the greatest movie actor there ever was ... I've learned more about acting from watching Tracy than in any other way."

Tracy was particularly respected for his naturalism on screen. Hume Cronyn, who worked with Tracy on "The Seventh Cross", admired his co-star's screen presence: "His method appeared to be as simple as it is difficult to achieve. He appeared to do nothing. He listened, he felt, he said the words without forcing anything." Joan Crawford likewise expressed her admiration for Tracy's seemingly effortless performances. His four-time co-star Joan Bennett said, "One never had the feeling he was 'acting' in a scene, but the truth of the situation was actually happening, spontaneously, at the moment he spoke his lines." James Cagney noted that Tracy was rarely the target of impressionists, because "You can't mimic reserve and control very well" and "there's nothing to imitate except his genius and that can't be mimicked." Specifically, Tracy was praised for his listening and reacting skills. Barry Nelson said that Tracy "brought the art of reacting to a new height"; Stanley Kramer declared that Tracy "thought and listened better than anyone in the history of motion pictures". Millard Kaufman noted that "[Tracy] listened with every fiber of his entire body". Burt Reynolds, in "But Enough About Me", similarly noted Tracy's emphasis on naturalism when, as a rookie actor, he observed Tracy on the sets of "Inherit the Wind". When Reynolds later introduced himself to Tracy as an actor, Tracy replied, "An actor, huh? Just remember not to ever let anyone catch you at it."

Despite the perception of being able to perform effortlessly, acquaintances of Tracy said that he would carefully prepare for each role. Joseph L. Mankiewicz lived with Tracy during the production of "Test Pilot", and recounted that the actor would lock himself in his bedroom "working extremely hard" each night. Many co-workers commented on his strong work-ethic and professionalism. Tracy did not like to rehearse, however, and would lose his effectiveness after two or three takes. Kanin described him as "an instinctive player, who trusted the moment of creation." Tracy's close friend Chester Erskine pinpointed his acting style as one of "selection"—he strove to give as little as was needed to be effective—reaching "a minimum to make the maximum."

Tracy disliked when he was asked about his technique, or about what advice he would give to others. He often belittled the profession, for instance saying to Kanin, "Why do actors think they're so God damn important? They're not. Acting is not an important job in the scheme of things. Plumbing is." Tracy was humble about his abilities, telling a journalist, "it's just that I try no tricks. No profile. No 'great lover' act ... I just project myself as I am—plain, trying to be honest." He was known to have enjoyed the quip once made by Alfred Lunt: "The art of acting is—learn your lines!" Katharine Hepburn, in an interview six years after Tracy's death, suggested that Tracy wished he had held a different profession.

In the 21st century, Tracy is best known to general audiences for his association with Katharine Hepburn. He continues to receive praise from film scholars: critic Leonard Maltin calls Tracy "one of the 20th century’s finest actors", while film historian Jeanine Basinger describes his career as a "golden record of movie achievement". Charles Matthews, writing for "The Washington Post", argues that "Tracy deserves to be remembered for himself, as a master of acting technique".

An award for excellence in film acting is bestowed in Tracy's name at the University of California, Los Angeles. Past recipients of the UCLA Spencer Tracy Award include James Stewart, Michael Douglas, Denzel Washington, Tom Hanks, Anthony Hopkins, Kirk Douglas and Morgan Freeman.

A 1986 PBS documentary titled "The Spencer Tracy Legacy" was hosted by Hepburn. It includes clips from Tracy's films, and behind-the-scenes archival footage and home movies of Tracy's private life and career, as well as newly filmed interviews with many of his former co-stars, and with his daughter Susie Tracy. In 2009, Tracy provided inspiration for the character Carl in Pixar's Oscar-winning film "Up". Director Pete Docter explained that there is "something sweet about these grumpy old guys". In 2014, a film about Tracy's relationship with Katharine Hepburn was announced to be in development.

Several of Tracy's films, particularly his comedies, are regarded as classics of American cinema. He starred in four of the titles on the American Film Institute's list of "100 Years ... 100 Laughs": "Adam's Rib", "It's a Mad, Mad, Mad, Mad World", "Father of the Bride" and "Woman of the Year". "Guess Who's Coming to Dinner" was included on AFI's list of the 100 greatest American movies, while "Captains Courageous" was featured on their list of America's most inspiring movies.

Tracy was nominated for nine Academy Awards for Best Actor, a category record he holds with Laurence Olivier. He was the first of nine actors to win the award twice, and is one of two actors to receive it consecutively, the other being Tom Hanks. Tracy was also nominated for five British Academy Film Awards, of which he won two, and four Golden Globe Awards, winning once. In addition, he received the Cannes Film Festival award for Best Actor and was once named Best Actor by the National Board of Review.

Tracy was recognized by the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences for the following performances:

Selected filmography:






</doc>
<doc id="168534" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=168534" title="William Hurt">
William Hurt

William McChord Hurt (born March 20, 1950) is an American actor. He received his acting training at the Juilliard School and began acting on stage in the 1970s. Hurt made his film debut in 1980 as a troubled scientist in Ken Russell's science-fiction feature "Altered States", for which he received a Golden Globe nomination for New Star of the Year. He subsequently played a leading role, as a lawyer who succumbs to the temptations of Kathleen Turner, in the neo-noir "Body Heat" (1981). He played another leading role, as Arkady Renko, in Gorky Park (1983).

In 1985, Hurt garnered critical acclaim and multiple acting awards, including an Academy Award and a BAFTA Award for Best Actor, for "Kiss of the Spider Woman". He received another two Academy Award nominations for his lead performances in "Children of a Lesser God" (1986) and "Broadcast News" (1987). Hurt remained an active stage actor throughout the 1980s, appearing in Off-Broadway productions, including "Henry V", "Fifth of July", "Richard II" and "A Midsummer Night's Dream". Hurt received his first Tony Award nomination in 1985 for the Broadway production of "Hurlyburly".

After playing a diversity of character roles in the following decade, Hurt earned his fourth Academy Award nomination for his supporting performance in David Cronenberg's crime thriller "A History of Violence" (2005). Other notable films in recent years have included "A.I. Artificial Intelligence" (2001), "The Village" (2004), "Syriana" (2005), "The Good Shepherd" (2006), "Mr. Brooks" (2007), "Into the Wild" (2007), "The Incredible Hulk" (2008), "Robin Hood" (2010) and "" (2016).

Hurt was born in Washington, D.C., the son of Claire Isabel (née McGill), who worked at Time Inc., and Alfred McChord Hurt, who worked for the State Department. With his father, he lived in Lahore, Mogadishu and Khartoum. After his parents divorced, his mother married Henry Luce III (a son of publisher Henry Luce) during Hurt's childhood. Hurt graduated from Middlesex School in 1968 where he was vice president of the Dramatics Club and had the lead role in several school plays. His high school yearbook predicted: "With characteristics such as these, you might even see him on Broadway." Hurt attended Tufts University and studied theology, but turned instead to acting and joined the Juilliard School (Drama Division "Group 5": 1972–1976). Two of his classmates there were the late actors Christopher Reeve and Robin Williams.

Hurt began his career in stage productions, only later acting in films. From 1977 to 1989, he was a member of the acting company at Circle Repertory Company. He won an Obie Award for his debut appearance there in Corinne Jacker's "My Life", and won a 1978 Theatre World Award for his performances in "Fifth of July", "Ulysses in Traction", and "Lulu". In 1979, Hurt played Hamlet under the direction of Marshall W. Mason opposite Lindsay Crouse and Beatrice Straight. His first major film role was in the science-fiction film "Altered States" where his performance as an obsessed scientist gained him wide recognition. His performance with Richard Crenna, Ted Danson and newcomer Kathleen Turner in Lawrence Kasdan's neo-noir classic "Body Heat" elevated Hurt to stardom, and he later also co-starred in "The Big Chill" (1983). He appeared in the thriller "Gorky Park" opposite Lee Marvin. He received the Best Male Performance Prize at the Cannes Film Festival and the Academy Award for Best Actor for "Kiss of the Spider Woman" in 1985. He has received three additional Oscar nominations: Best Actor for "Children of a Lesser God" (1986) and "Broadcast News" (1987; he was thus nominated for Best Actor for three consecutive years) and Best Supporting Actor for "A History Of Violence" (2005). Hurt also starred in "Tuck Everlasting" as Angus Tuck.

Often cast as an intellectual, Hurt has appeared as such in films such as "Lost in Space", but has also been effective in other kinds of role, such as those in "I Love You to Death" and David Cronenberg's psychological drama "A History of Violence" (2005), where in less than 10 minutes of screen time he plays the creepy mob boss, Richie Cusack. Also in 2005, Hurt played a mysterious government operative in Stephen Gaghan's ensemble drama about the politics of big oil, "Syriana".

Hurt was in the miniseries adaptation of Stephen King's "", in a piece entitled "Battleground" (also notable for its complete lack of dialogue). He plays Renshaw, a hitman who receives a package from the widow of a toymaker he had killed, unaware of what is waiting inside for him. He appeared in the cast of "Vanya", an adaptation of Chekhov's "Uncle Vanya", at the Artists Repertory Theatre in Portland, Oregon.

In June 2007, Marvel Studios announced Hurt would portray the Hulk character General “Thunderbolt” Ross in 2008's "The Incredible Hulk" alongside Edward Norton, Liv Tyler and Tim Roth. Hurt reprised his role in "" (2016).

He appeared in Sean Penn's film "Into the Wild", the true story of Christopher McCandless. He appeared as President Henry Ashton in the 2008 action-thriller "Vantage Point". Hurt also played Mr. Brooks's alter ego in "Mr. Brooks" starring Kevin Costner.

In 2009, Hurt became a series regular on the FX series "Damages" playing a corporate whistleblower opposite Glenn Close and Marcia Gay Harden. For his role in the series, Hurt earned a 2009 Primetime Emmy Award nomination in the "Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Drama Series" category. Hurt's 2009 Sundance film "The Yellow Handkerchief" was released in theaters on February 26, 2010 by Samuel Goldwyn Films. He was in the Thailand-based 2011 thriller "Hellgate" alongside Cary Elwes and Paula Taylor, directed by John Penney.

In September 2010, Hurt played United States Secretary of the Treasury Henry Paulson in the HBO film "Too Big to Fail", an adaptation of Andrew Ross Sorkin's book. He also starred as Captain Ahab in the 2011 television adaptation of Herman Melville's novel "Moby-Dick".

Hurt is fluent in French and maintains a home outside Paris. He is the step-grandson of Henry Luce, founder of "Time" magazine and actress-writer Clare Boothe Luce, through his mother's marriage to Henry Luce's son from his first marriage, Henry Luce III.

Hurt was married to Mary Beth Hurt from 1971 to 1982. In the 1980s, Hurt was involved in a lawsuit with Sandra Jennings, who alleged that the two shared a common-law marriage. While he was still married, Hurt and Jennings had begun a relationship in Saratoga Springs, New York, in 1981. Jennings became pregnant in the spring of 1982 which precipitated Hurt's divorce from Mary Beth Hurt, after which Hurt and Jennings relocated to South Carolina, a state that recognized common-law marriages. Hurt and Jennings remained officially unmarried, later separated and Jennings sued him in New York, seeking recognition of the "marriage" under South Carolina law. The New York court, which did not recognize common-law marriage and was reluctant to recognize a common-law marriage originating in South Carolina, found in Hurt's favor that no common-law marriage existed.

Hurt dated Marlee Matlin for one year, and they cohabited for two years. In her 2009 autobiography "I'll Scream Later", Matlin claimed that their relationship involved considerable drug abuse and physical abuse by Hurt. In response to the accusations aired on CNN on April 13, 2009, Hurt's agent declined to respond, but Hurt issued a statement the following day, which said: "My own recollection is that we both apologized and both did a great deal to heal our lives. Of course, I did and do apologize for any pain I caused. And I know we have both grown. I wish Marlee and her family nothing but good."

Hurt has four children: one with Sandra Jennings, two with Heidi Henderson, and one with French actress, film director and screenwriter Sandrine Bonnaire.

During filming of "Kiss of the Spider Woman", Hurt and a friend were threatened at gunpoint but were let go several hours later.

Hurt is a private pilot and owner of a Beechcraft Bonanza.



</doc>
<doc id="41906" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=41906" title="Al Pacino">
Al Pacino

Alfredo James Pacino (; born April 25, 1940) is an American actor and filmmaker. Pacino has had a career spanning over five decades, during which time he has received numerous accolades and honors both competitive and honorary, among them an Academy Award, two Tony Awards, two Primetime Emmy Awards, a British Academy Film Award, four Golden Globe Awards, the Lifetime Achievement Award from the American Film Institute, the Golden Globe Cecil B. DeMille Award, and the National Medal of Arts. He is also one of few performers to have won a competitive Oscar, an Emmy, and a Tony Award for acting, dubbed the "Triple Crown of Acting".

A method actor and former student of the HB Studio and the Actors Studio in New York City, where he was taught by Charlie Laughton and Lee Strasberg, Pacino made his feature film debut with a minor role in "Me, Natalie" (1969) and gained favorable notices for his lead role as a heroin addict in "The Panic in Needle Park" (1971). He achieved international acclaim and recognition for his breakthrough role as Michael Corleone in Francis Ford Coppola's "The Godfather" (1972). He received his first Oscar nomination and would reprise the role in the equally successful sequels "The Godfather Part II" (1974) and "The Godfather Part III" (1990). Pacino's performance as Michael Corleone is now regarded as one of the greatest screen performances in film history.

Pacino received his first Best Actor Oscar nomination for "Serpico" (1973); he was also nominated for "The Godfather Part II", "Dog Day Afternoon" (1975) and "...And Justice for All" (1979) and won the award in 1993 for his performance as the blind Lieutenant Colonel Slade in "Scent of a Woman" (1992). For his performances in "The Godfather", "Dick Tracy" (1990) and "Glengarry Glen Ross" (1992), Pacino was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor. Other notable roles include Tony Montana in "Scarface" (1983), Carlito Brigante in "Carlito's Way" (1993), Lieutenant Vincent Hanna in "Heat" (1995), Benjamin Ruggiero in "Donnie Brasco" (1997), Lowell Bergman in "The Insider" (1999) and Detective Will Dormer in "Insomnia" (2002). In television, Pacino has acted in several productions for HBO including the miniseries "Angels in America" (2003) and the Jack Kevorkian biopic "You Don't Know Jack" (2010), both of which won him the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Miniseries or a Movie.

In addition to his work in film, Pacino has had an extensive career on stage and is a two-time Tony Award winner, in 1969 and 1977, for his performances in "Does a Tiger Wear a Necktie?" and "The Basic Training of Pavlo Hummel" respectively. A lifelong fan of Shakespeare, Pacino directed and starred in "Looking for Richard" (1996), a documentary film about the play "Richard III", a role which Pacino had earlier portrayed on-stage in 1977. He has also acted as Shylock in a 2004 feature film adaptation and a 2010 production of "The Merchant of Venice". Having made his filmmaking debut with "Looking for Richard", Pacino has also directed and starred in the independent film "Chinese Coffee" (2000) and the films "Wilde Salomé" (2011) and "Salomé" (2013), about the play "Salomé" by Oscar Wilde. Since 1994, Pacino has been the joint president of the Actors Studio with Ellen Burstyn and Harvey Keitel. In 2016, he received the Kennedy Center Honor.

Pacino was born in the East Harlem neighborhood of New York City, to Sicilian-American parents Salvatore and Rose () Pacino. His parents divorced when he was two years old. His mother then took him to The Bronx to live with her parents, Kate and James Gerardi, who, coincidentally, had come from a town in Sicily named Corleone. His father, who was from San Fratello of Sicily, in the Province of Messina, moved to Covina, California to work as an insurance salesman and restaurateur, and had not been in his life since then.

In his teen years "Sonny", as he was known to his friends, aimed to become a baseball player, and was also nicknamed "The Actor". Pacino went to the Herman Ridder Junior High School, but in secondary school dropped out of many classes except English. He subsequently attended the High School of Performing Arts, but dropped out of school at age 17. His mother disagreed with his decision and after an argument, he left home. To finance his acting studies, he took low-paying jobs as messenger, busboy, janitor, and postal clerk, and once worked in the mail room for "Commentary" magazine.

He began smoking and drinking at age nine, and casual marijuana use at age 13, but he abstained from hard drugs. His two closest friends died from drug abuse at the ages of 19 and 30. Growing up in The Bronx, he got into occasional fights and was considered something of a troublemaker at school.

He acted in basement plays in New York's theatrical underground but was rejected for the Actors Studio as a teenager. Pacino then joined the Herbert Berghof Studio (HB Studio), where he met acting teacher Charlie Laughton (not to be confused with the British actor Charles Laughton), who became his mentor and best friend. In this period, he was often unemployed and homeless, and sometimes slept on the street, in theaters, or at friends' houses.

In 1962, his mother died at the age of 43. The following year, Pacino's grandfather James Gerardi, also died. Pacino recalled it as "the lowest point of my life"; he said, "I was 22 and the two most influential people in my life had gone, so that sent me into a tailspin."

After four years at HB Studio, Pacino successfully auditioned for the Actors Studio. The Actors Studio is a membership organization of professional actors, theatre directors and playwrights in the Hell's Kitchen neighborhood of Manhattan in New York City. Pacino studied "method acting" under acting coach Lee Strasberg, who appeared with Pacino in the films "The Godfather Part II" and in "...And Justice for All".

During later interviews he spoke about Strasberg and the Studio's effect on his career. "The Actors Studio meant so much to me in my life. Lee Strasberg hasn't been given the credit he deserves ... Next to Charlie, it sort of launched me. It really did. That was a remarkable turning point in my life. It was directly responsible for getting me to quit all those jobs and just stay acting."

In another interview he added, "It was exciting to work for him [Lee Strasberg] because he was so interesting when he talked about a scene or talked about people. One would just want to hear him talk, because things he would say, you'd never heard before ... He had such a great understanding ... he loved actors so much."

Pacino is currently co-president, along with Ellen Burstyn and Harvey Keitel, of the Actors Studio.

In 1967, Pacino spent a season at the Charles Playhouse in Boston, performing in Clifford Odets' "Awake and Sing!" (his first major paycheck: a week); and in Jean-Claude Van Itallie's "America, Hurrah", where he met actress Jill Clayburgh on this play. They had a five-year romance and moved back together to New York City.

In 1968, Pacino starred in Israel Horovitz's "The Indian Wants the Bronx" at the Astor Place Theater, playing Murph, a street punk. The play opened January 17, 1968, and ran for 177 performances; it was staged in a double bill with Horovitz's "It's Called the Sugar Plum", starring Clayburgh. Pacino won an Obie Award for Best Actor for his role, with John Cazale winning for Best Supporting actor and Horowitz for Best New Play. Martin Bregman saw the play and became Pacino's manager, a partnership that became fruitful in the years to come, as Bregman encouraged Pacino to do "The Godfather", "Serpico" and "Dog Day Afternoon". "Martin Bregman discovered me off Broadway. I was 26, 25. And he discovered me and became my manager. And that's why I'm here. I owe it to Marty, I really do," Pacino himself has stated about his own career.

Pacino and this production of "The Indian Wants the Bronx" traveled to Italy for a performance at the Festival dei Due Mondi in Spoleto. It was Pacino's first journey to Italy; he later recalled that "performing for an Italian audience was a marvelous experience". Pacino and Clayburgh were cast in "Deadly Circle of Violence", an episode of the ABC television series "NYPD", premiering November 12, 1968. Clayburgh at the time was also appearing on the soap opera "Search for Tomorrow", playing the role of Grace Bolton. Her father would send the couple money each month to help.

On February 25, 1969, Pacino made his Broadway debut in Don Petersen's "Does a Tiger Wear a Necktie?" at the Belasco Theater produced by A&P Heir Huntington Hartford. It closed after 39 performances on March 29, 1969, but Pacino received rave reviews and won the Tony Award on April 20, 1969. Pacino continued performing onstage in the 1970s, winning a second Tony Award for "The Basic Training of Pavlo Hummel" and performing the title role in "Richard III". In the 1980s, Pacino again achieved critical success on stage while appearing in David Mamet's "American Buffalo," for which Pacino was nominated for a Drama Desk Award. Since 1990, Pacino's stage work has included revivals of Eugene O'Neill's "Hughie", Oscar Wilde's "Salome" and in 2005 Lyle Kessler's "Orphans".

In 1983, Pacino became a Major Donor for The Mirror Theater Ltd, alongside Dustin Hoffman and Paul Newman, matching a grant from Laurence Rockefeller. The men were inspired to invest by their connection with Lee Strasberg, as Lee’s then daughter-in-law Sabra Jones was the Founder and Producing Artistic Director of The Mirror. In 1985, Al offered the company his production of "Hughie" by Eugene O’Neill but the company was unable to do it at the time due to the small cast.

In October 2002, Pacino starred in Bertolt Brecht's "The Resistible Rise of Arturo Ui" for the National Actor's Theater and Complicite. Directed by Simon McBurney, the production starred a host of Hollywood names including John Goodman, Charles Durning, Tony Randall, Steve Buscemi, Chaz Palmentari, Paul Giamatti, Jacqueline McKenzie, Billy Crudupp, Lothaire Bluteau, Dominic Chianese and Steling K Brown. The production was a critical success in which "Pacino grabs and holds the attention like a coiled spring about to snap. He is all brooding menace and crocodile grimace, butchering his way to the top with unnervingly sinister glee."

Pacino made his return to the stage in summer 2010, as Shylock in a Shakespeare in the Park production of "The Merchant of Venice". The acclaimed production moved to Broadway at the Broadhurst Theatre in October, earning US$1 million at the box office in its first week. The performance also garnered him a Tony Award nomination for Best Leading Actor in a Play. In October 2012 Pacino starred in the 30th anniversary Broadway revival of David Mamet's classic play, "Glengarry Glen Ross", which ran through January 20, 2013.

From the end of 2015 through January 2016, he starred on Broadway in "China Doll", a play written for him by David Mamet. It is a limited run of 87 performances, after acclaimed reviews of 4 performances in October 2015.

Pacino found acting enjoyable and realized he had a gift for it while studying at The Actors Studio. However, his early work was not financially rewarding. After his success on stage, Pacino made his film debut in 1969 with a brief appearance in "Me, Natalie", an independent film starring Patty Duke. In 1970, Pacino signed with the talent agency Creative Management Associates (CMA).

It was the 1971 film "The Panic in Needle Park", in which he played a heroin addict, that brought Pacino to the attention of director Francis Ford Coppola, who cast him as Michael Corleone in the blockbuster Mafia film "The Godfather" (1972). Although several established actorsincluding Jack Nicholson, Robert Redford, Warren Beatty, and little-known Robert De Niroalso tried out for the part, Coppola selected the relatively unknown Pacino, to the dismay of studio executives.

Pacino's performance earned him an Academy Award nomination, and offered a prime example of his early acting style, described by Halliwell's Film Guide as "intense" and "tightly clenched". Pacino boycotted the Academy Award ceremony, insulted at being nominated for the Supporting Acting award, noting that he had more screen time than co-star and Best Actor winner Marlon Brandowho also boycotted the awards, but for unrelated reasons.

In 1973, he co-starred in "Scarecrow", with Gene Hackman, and won the Palme d'Or at the Cannes Film Festival. That same year, Pacino was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Actor after starring in "Serpico", based on the true story of New York City policeman Frank Serpico, who went undercover to expose the corruption of fellow officers. In 1974, Pacino reprised his role as Michael Corleone in the sequel "The Godfather Part II", which was the first sequel to win the Best Picture Oscar; Pacino, meanwhile, was nominated for his third Oscar.

"Newsweek" magazine has described his performance in "The Godfather Part II" as "arguably cinema's greatest portrayal of the hardening of a heart". In 1975, he enjoyed further success with the release of "Dog Day Afternoon", based on the true story of bank robber John Wojtowicz. It was directed by Sidney Lumet, who had directed him in "Serpico" a few years earlier, and Pacino was again nominated for Best Actor.

In 1977, Pacino starred as a race-car driver in "Bobby Deerfield", directed by Sydney Pollack, and received a Golden Globe nomination for Best Actor – Motion Picture Drama for his portrayal of the title role. His next film was the courtroom drama "...And Justice for All", which again saw Pacino lauded by critics for his wide range of acting abilities, and nominated for the Best Actor Oscar for a fourth time. However, he lost out that year to Dustin Hoffman in "Kramer vs. Kramer"—a role that Pacino had declined.

During the 1970s, Pacino had four Oscar nominations for Best Actor, for his performances in "Serpico", "The Godfather Part II", "Dog Day Afternoon", and "...And Justice for All".

Pacino's career slumped in the early 1980s; his appearances in the controversial "Cruising", a film that provoked protests from New York's gay community, and the comedy-drama "Author! Author!", were critically panned. However, 1983's "Scarface", directed by Brian De Palma, proved to be a career highlight and a defining role. Upon its initial release, the film was critically panned due to violent content, but later received critical acclaim. The film did well at the box office, grossing over US$45 million domestically. Pacino earned a Golden Globe nomination for his role as Cuban drug lord Tony Montana.

In 1985, Pacino worked on his personal project, "The Local Stigmatic", a 1969 Off Broadway play by the English writer Heathcote Williams. He starred in the play, remounting it with director David Wheeler and the Theater Company of Boston in a 50-minute film version. The film was not released theatrically, but was later released as part of the "Pacino: An Actor's Vision" box set in 2007.

His 1985 film "Revolution" about a fur trapper during the American Revolutionary War, was a commercial and critical failure, which Pacino blamed on a rushed production, resulting in a four-year hiatus from films. At this time Pacino returned to the stage. He mounted workshop productions of "Crystal Clear", "National Anthems" and other plays; he appeared in "Julius Caesar" in 1988 in producer Joseph Papp's New York Shakespeare Festival. Pacino remarked on his hiatus from film: "I remember back when everything was happening, '74, '75, doing "The Resistible Rise of Arturo Ui" on stage and reading that the reason I'd gone back to the stage was that my movie career was waning! That's been the kind of ethos, the way in which theater's perceived, unfortunately." Pacino returned to film in 1989's "Sea of Love", when he portrayed a detective hunting a serial killer who finds victims through the singles column in a newspaper. The film earned solid reviews.

Pacino received an Academy Award nomination for playing Big Boy Caprice in the box office hit "Dick Tracy" in 1990, of which critic Roger Ebert described Pacino as "the scene-stealer". Later in the year he followed this up in a return to one of his most famous characters, Michael Corleone, in "The Godfather Part III" (1990). The film received mixed reviews, and had problems in pre-production due to script rewrites and the withdrawal of actors shortly before production.

In 1991, Pacino starred in "Frankie and Johnny" with Michelle Pfeiffer, who co-starred with Pacino in "Scarface". Pacino portrays a recently paroled cook who begins a relationship with a waitress (Pfeiffer) in the diner where they work. It was adapted by Terrence McNally from his own Off-Broadway play "Frankie and Johnny in the Clair de Lune" (1987), that featured Kenneth Welsh and Kathy Bates. The film received mixed reviews, although Pacino later said he enjoyed playing the part. Janet Maslin in "The New York Times" wrote, "Mr. Pacino has not been this uncomplicatedly appealing since his "Dog Day Afternoon" days, and he makes Johnny's endless enterprise in wooing Frankie a delight. His scenes alone with Ms. Pfeiffer have a precision and honesty that keep the film's maudlin aspects at bay."

In 1993, Pacino won the Academy Award for Best Actor, for his portrayal of the blind U.S. Army Lieutenant Colonel Frank Slade in Martin Brest's "Scent of a Woman". That year, he was also nominated for Best Supporting Actor for "Glengarry Glen Ross", making Pacino the first male actor ever to receive two acting nominations for two movies in the same year, and to win for the lead role.

Pacino starred alongside Sean Penn in the crime drama "Carlito's Way" in 1993, in which he portrayed a gangster released from prison with the help of his lawyer (Penn) and vows to go straight. Pacino starred in Michael Mann's "Heat" (1995), in which he and Robert De Niro appeared on-screen together for the first time (though both Pacino and De Niro starred in "The Godfather Part II", they did not share any scenes).

In 1996, Pacino starred in his theatrical docudrama "Looking for Richard", a performance of selected scenes of Shakespeare's "Richard III" and a broader examination of Shakespeare's continuing role and relevance in popular culture. The cast brought together for the performance included Alec Baldwin, Kevin Spacey, and Winona Ryder. Pacino played Satan in the supernatural thriller "The Devil's Advocate" (1997) which co-starred Keanu Reeves. The film was a success at the box office, taking US$150 million worldwide. Roger Ebert wrote in the "Chicago Sun-Times", "The satanic character is played by Pacino with relish bordering on glee."

In 1997's "Donnie Brasco", Pacino played gangster "Lefty" in the true story of undercover FBI agent Donnie Brasco (Johnny Depp) and his work in bringing down the Mafia from the inside. In 1999, Pacino starred as "60 Minutes" producer Lowell Bergman in the multi-Oscar nominated "The Insider" opposite Russell Crowe, and in Oliver Stone's "Any Given Sunday".

Pacino has not received another Academy Award nomination since winning for "Scent of a Woman", but has won three Golden Globes since the year 2000, the first being the Cecil B. DeMille Award in 2001 for lifetime achievement in motion pictures.

In 2000, Pacino released a low-budget film adaptation of Ira Lewis' play "Chinese Coffee" to film festivals. Shot almost exclusively as a one-on-one conversation between two main characters, the project took nearly three years to complete and was funded entirely by Pacino. "Chinese Coffee" was included with Pacino's two other rare films he was involved in producing, "The Local Stigmatic" and "Looking for Richard", on a special DVD box set titled "Pacino: An Actor's Vision", which was released in 2007. Pacino produced prologues and epilogues for the discs containing the films.

Pacino turned down an offer to reprise his role as Michael Corleone in the computer game version of "". As a result, Electronic Arts was not permitted to use Pacino's likeness or voice in the game, although his character does appear in it. He did allow his likeness to appear in the video game adaptation of 1983's "Scarface", quasi-sequel titled "".

Director Christopher Nolan worked with Pacino on "Insomnia", a remake of the Norwegian film of the same name, co-starring Robin Williams. "Newsweek" stated that "he [Pacino] can play small as rivetingly as he can play big, that he can implode as well as explode". The film and Pacino's performance were well received, gaining a favorable rating of 93 percent on the review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes. The film did moderately well at the box office, taking in $113 million worldwide. His next film, "S1m0ne", did not gain much critical praise or box office success.

He played a publicist in "People I Know", a small film that received little attention despite Pacino's well-received performance. Rarely taking a supporting role since his commercial breakthrough, he accepted a small part in the box office flop "Gigli", in 2003, as a favor to director Martin Brest. "The Recruit", released in 2003, featured Pacino as a CIA recruiter and co-stars Colin Farrell. The film received mixed reviews, and has been described by Pacino as something he "personally couldn't follow". Pacino next starred as lawyer Roy Cohn in the 2003 HBO miniseries "Angels in America", an adaptation of Tony Kushner's Pulitzer Prize winning play of the same name. For this performance, Pacino won his third Golden Globe, for Best Performance by an Actor, in 2004.

Pacino starred as Shylock in Michael Radford's 2004 film adaptation of "The Merchant of Venice", choosing to bring compassion and depth to a character traditionally played as a villainous caricature. In "Two for the Money", Pacino portrays a sports gambling agent and mentor for Matthew McConaughey, alongside Rene Russo. The film was released on October 8, 2005, to mixed reviews. Desson Thomson wrote in "The Washington Post", "Al Pacino has played the mentor so many times, he ought to get a kingmaker's award ... the fight between good and evil feels fixed in favor of Hollywood redemption."

On October 20, 2006, the American Film Institute named Pacino the recipient of the 35th AFI Life Achievement Award. On November 22, 2006, the University Philosophical Society of Trinity College, Dublin awarded Pacino the Honorary Patronage of the Society.

Pacino played a spoof role in Steven Soderbergh's "Ocean's Thirteen", alongside George Clooney, Brad Pitt, Matt Damon, Elliott Gould and Andy García, as the villain Willy Bank, a casino tycoon targeted by Danny Ocean and his crew. The film received generally favorable reviews.

"88 Minutes" was released on April 18, 2008, in the United States, after having been released in various other countries in 2007. The film co-starred Alicia Witt and was critically panned, although critics found fault with the plot, and not Pacino's acting. In "Righteous Kill", Pacino and Robert De Niro co-star as New York detectives searching for a serial killer. The film was released to theaters on September 12, 2008. While it was an anticipated return for the two stars, it was not well received by critics. Lou Lumenick of the "New York Post" gave "Righteous Kill" one star out of four, saying: "Al Pacino and Robert De Niro collect bloated paychecks with intent to bore in "Righteous Kill", a slow-moving, ridiculous police thriller that would have been shipped straight to the remainder bin at Blockbuster if it starred anyone else."

Pacino played Dr. Jack Kevorkian in an HBO Films biopic titled "You Don't Know Jack", which premiered April 2010. The film is about the life and work of the physician-assisted suicide advocate. The performance earned Pacino his second Emmy Award for lead actor and his fourth Golden Globe award. He co-starred as himself in the 2011 comedy film "Jack and Jill". The film was panned by critics, and Pacino "won" the Golden Raspberry Award for Worst Supporting Actor at the 32nd ceremony.

It was announced in May 2011 that Pacino was to be honored with the "Glory to the Film-maker" award at the 68th Venice International Film Festival. The award was presented ahead of the premiere of his film "Wilde Salomé", the third film Pacino has directed. Pacino, who plays the role of Herod in the film, describes it as his "most personal project ever". Its US premiere on the evening of March 21, 2012, before a full house at the 1,400-seat Castro Theatre in San Francisco's Castro District, marked the 130th anniversary of Oscar Wilde's visit to San Francisco, the event was a benefit for the GLBT Historical Society.

Pacino starred in a 2013 HBO biographical picture about record producer Phil Spector's murder trial, titled "Phil Spector". He played the title character in the comedy-drama "Danny Collins", an aging rockstar, in March 2015. His performance in the film garnered him a Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy nomination.

Pacino will star with Robert De Niro in Martin Scorsese's biographical crime film "The Irishman", which is expected to be released in 2019. It was announced in January 2013 that Pacino would play the late former Penn State University football coach Joe Paterno in the television film "Paterno" based on a 2012 biography of Paterno by sportswriter Joe Posnanski.

Although he has never married, Pacino has three children. The eldest, Julie Marie (born 1989), is his daughter with acting coach Jan Tarrant. He also has twins, son Anton James and daughter Olivia Rose (born January 25, 2001), with actress Beverly D'Angelo, with whom he had a relationship from 1996 until 2003. Pacino had a relationship with Diane Keaton, his co-star in the "Godfather" trilogy. The on-again, off-again relationship ended following the filming of "The Godfather Part II". He has had relationships with Tuesday Weld, Jill Clayburgh, Marthe Keller, Kathleen Quinlan and Lyndall Hobbs.

The Internal Revenue Service filed a tax lien against Pacino, claiming he owes the government a total of $188,000 for 2008 and 2009. A representative for Pacino blamed his former business manager Kenneth Starr for the discrepancy.

Pacino has been nominated and has won many awards during his acting career, including eight Oscar nominations (winning one), 17 Golden Globe nominations (winning four), five BAFTA nominations (winning two), two Primetime Emmy Awards for his work on television, and two Tony Awards for his stage work. In 2007, the American Film Institute awarded Pacino with a lifetime achievement award and, in 2003, British television viewers voted Pacino as the greatest film star of all time in a poll for Channel 4.



</doc>
<doc id="77491" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=77491" title="Gregory Peck">
Gregory Peck

Eldred Gregory Peck (April 5, 1916 – June 12, 2003) was an American actor who was one of the most popular film stars from the 1940s to the 1960s. Peck continued to play major film roles until the late 1980s. His performance as Atticus Finch in the 1962 film "To Kill a Mockingbird" earned him the Academy Award for Best Actor. 

Peck also received Oscar nominations for his roles in "The Keys of the Kingdom" (1944), "The Yearling" (1946), "Gentleman's Agreement" (1947) and "Twelve O'Clock High" (1949). Other notable films he appeared in include "Spellbound" (1945), "Roman Holiday" (1953), "Moby Dick" (1956, and its 1998 miniseries), "Pork Chop Hill" (1959), "The Guns of Navarone" (1961), "Cape Fear" (1962, and its 1991 remake), "How the West Was Won" (1962), "The Omen" (1976) and "The Boys from Brazil" (1978).

U.S. President Lyndon Johnson honored Peck with the Presidential Medal of Freedom in 1969 for his lifetime humanitarian efforts. In 1999, the American Film Institute named Peck among Greatest Male Stars of Classic Hollywood cinema, ranking him at No. 12.

Eldred Gregory Peck was born on April 5, 1916, in La Jolla, San Diego, California, the son of Gregory Pearl Peck, a New York-born chemist and pharmacist, and his Missouri-born wife Bernice Mary "Bunny" (née Ayres). His father was of English (paternal) and Irish (maternal) heritage and his mother of English and Scots ancestry. She converted to her husband's religion, Roman Catholicism, when she married his father, and Peck was raised as a Catholic. Through his Irish-born paternal grandmother Catherine Ashe, Peck was related to Thomas Ashe, who participated in the Easter Rising less than three weeks after Peck's birth and died while being force fed during his hunger strike in 1917.

Peck's parents divorced when he was five and he was brought up by his maternal grandmother, who took him to the movies every week. At the age of 10 he was sent to a Catholic military school, St. John's Military Academy in Los Angeles. While he was a student there, his grandmother died. At 14, he moved back to San Diego to live with his father, attended San Diego High School, and after graduating enrolled for one year at San Diego State Teacher's College, (now known as San Diego State University). While there he joined the track team, took his first theatre and public-speaking courses, and pledged the Epsilon Eta fraternity. Peck however had ambitions to be a doctor and the following year gained admission to the University of California, Berkeley, as an English major and pre-medical student. Standing , he rowed on the university crew. Although his tuition fee was only $26 per year, Peck still struggled to pay, and took a job as a "hasher" (kitchen helper) for the Gamma Phi Beta sorority in exchange for meals.

At Berkeley, encouraged by the acting coach, who saw in him perfect material for university theatre, Peck became more and more interested in acting. He was recruited by Edwin Duerr, director of the university's Little Theater, and appeared in five plays during his senior year. Peck would later say about Berkeley that, "it was a very special experience for me and three of the greatest years of my life. It woke me up and made me a human being." In 1997, Peck donated $25,000 to the Berkeley rowing crew in honor of his coach, the renowned Ky Ebright.

After graduating from Berkeley with a BA degree in English, Peck dropped the name "Eldred" and headed to New York City to study at the Neighborhood Playhouse with the legendary acting teacher Sanford Meisner. He was often broke and sometimes slept in Central Park. He worked at the 1939 World's Fair and as a tour guide for NBC's television broadcasting. In 1940, Peck learned more of the acting craft, working in exchange for food, at the Barter Theatre in Abingdon, Virginia, appearing in five plays including "Family Portrait" and "On Earth As It Is".

His stage career began in 1941 when he played the secretary in a Katharine Cornell production of George Bernard Shaw's play "The Doctor's Dilemma". Unfortunately, the play opened in San Francisco just one week before the attack on Pearl Harbor. He made his Broadway debut as the lead in Emlyn Williams' "The Morning Star" in 1942. His second Broadway performance that year was in "The Willow and I" with Edward Pawley. Peck's acting abilities were in high demand during World War II because he was exempt from military service owing to a back injury suffered while receiving dance and movement lessons from Martha Graham as part of his acting training. Twentieth Century Fox claimed he had injured his back while rowing at university, but in Peck's words, "In Hollywood, they didn't think a dance class was macho enough, I guess. I've been trying to straighten out that story for years."

In 1947, Peck co-founded The La Jolla Playhouse, at his birthplace, with Mel Ferrer and Dorothy McGuire. This summer stock company presented productions in the La Jolla High School Auditorium from 1947 till 1964. The La Jolla Playhouse reopened at a new home in 1983 at the University of California, San Diego) still thrives today. It has attracted Hollywood film stars on hiatus both as performers and enthusiastic supporters since its inception.

Peck's first film, "Days of Glory", was released in 1944. He was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Actor five times, four of which came in his first five years of film acting: for "The Keys of the Kingdom" (1944), "The Yearling" (1946), "Gentleman's Agreement" (1947), and "Twelve O'Clock High" (1949).

"The Keys of the Kingdom" emphasized his stately presence. As the farmer Ezra "Penny" Baxter in "The Yearling", his good-humored warmth and affection toward the characters playing his son and wife confounded critics who had been insisting he was a lifeless performer. "Duel in the Sun" (1946) showed his range as an actor in his first "against type" role as a cruel, libidinous gunslinger. "Gentleman's Agreement" established his power in the "social conscience" genre in a film that took on the deep-seated but subtle antisemitism of mid-century corporate America. "Twelve O'Clock High" was the first of many successful war films in which Peck embodied the brave, effective, yet human fighting man.

Among his other films were "Spellbound" (1945), "The Paradine Case" (1947), "The Gunfighter" (1950), "Moby Dick" (1956), "The Man in the Gray Flannel Suit" (1956), "On the Beach" (1959), which brought to life the terrors of global nuclear war, "The Guns of Navarone" (1961), and "Roman Holiday" (1953), with Audrey Hepburn in her Oscar-winning role. Peck and Hepburn were close friends until her death; Peck even introduced her to her first husband, Mel Ferrer. Peck once again teamed up with director William Wyler in the epic Western "The Big Country" (1958), which he co-produced.

Peck won the Academy Award with his fifth nomination, playing Atticus Finch, a Depression-era lawyer and widowed father, in a film adaptation of the Harper Lee novel "To Kill a Mockingbird". Released in 1962 during the height of the Civil Rights Movement in the Southern United States, this film and his role were Peck's favorites. In 2003, Peck's portrayal of Atticus Finch was named the greatest film hero of the past 100 years by the American Film Institute.
Peck served as the president of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences in 1967, Chairman of the Board of Trustees of the American Film Institute from 1967 to 1969, Chairman of the Motion Picture and Television Relief Fund in 1971, and National Chairman of the American Cancer Society in 1966. He was a member of the National Council on the Arts from 1964 to 1966.

A physically powerful man, he was known to do a majority of his own fight scenes, rarely using body or stunt doubles. In fact, Robert Mitchum, his on-screen opponent in "Cape Fear", told about the time Peck once accidentally punched him for real during their final fight scene in the movie. He felt the impact for days afterward. Peck's rare attempts at villainous roles were not acclaimed. Early on, he played the renegade son in the Western "Duel in the Sun" and, later in his career, the infamous Nazi doctor Josef Mengele in "The Boys from Brazil" co-starring Laurence Olivier.

In the 1980s, Peck moved to television, where he starred in the mini-series "The Blue and the Gray", playing Abraham Lincoln. He also starred with Christopher Plummer, John Gielgud, and Barbara Bouchet in the television film "The Scarlet and The Black", about Monsignor Hugh O'Flaherty, a real-life Catholic priest in the Vatican who smuggled Jews and other refugees away from the Nazis during World War II.
Peck, Mitchum, and Martin Balsam all had roles in the 1991 remake of "Cape Fear" directed by Martin Scorsese. All three were in the original 1962 version. In the remake, Peck played Max Cady's lawyer.

His last prominent film role also came in 1991, in "Other People's Money", directed by Norman Jewison and based on the stage play of that name. Peck played a business owner trying to save his company against a hostile takeover bid by a Wall Street liquidator played by Danny DeVito.

Peck retired from active film-making at that point. Peck spent the last few years of his life touring the world doing speaking engagements in which he would show clips from his movies, reminisce, and take questions from the audience. He did come out of retirement for a 1998 miniseries version of one of his most famous films, "Moby Dick", portraying Father Mapple (played by Orson Welles in the 1956 version), with Patrick Stewart as Captain Ahab, the role Peck played in the earlier film. It would be his final performance, and it won him the Golden Globe for Best Supporting Actor in a Series, Miniseries or Television Film.

Peck had been offered the role of Grandpa Joe in the 2005 film "Charlie and the Chocolate Factory", but died before he could accept it. The Irish actor David Kelly was then given the part.

In 1947, while many Hollywood figures were being blacklisted for similar activities, Peck signed a letter deploring a House Un-American Activities Committee investigation of alleged communists in the film industry.

A lifelong supporter of the Democratic Party, Peck was suggested in 1970 as a possible Democratic candidate to run against Ronald Reagan for the office of California Governor. Although he later admitted that he had no interest in being a candidate himself for public office, Peck encouraged one of his sons, Carey Peck, to run for political office. Carey was defeated both times by slim margins in races in 1978 and 1980 against Republican U.S. Representative Bob Dornan, another former actor.

In an interview with the Irish media, Peck revealed that former President Lyndon Johnson had told him that, had he sought re-election in 1968, he intended to offer Peck the post of U.S. ambassador to Ireland – a post Peck, owing to his Irish ancestry, said he might well have taken, saying "[It] would have been a great adventure". The actor's biographer Michael Freedland substantiates the report and says that Johnson indicated that his presentation of the Medal of Freedom to Peck would perhaps make up for his inability to confer the ambassadorship. President Richard Nixon, though, placed Peck on his enemies list owing to his liberal activism.

Peck was outspoken against the Vietnam War, while remaining supportive of his son, Stephen, who fought there. In 1972, Peck produced the film version of Daniel Berrigan's play "The Trial of the Catonsville Nine" about the prosecution of a group of Vietnam protesters for civil disobedience. Despite his reservations about American general Douglas MacArthur as a man, Peck had long wanted to play him on film, and did so in "MacArthur" in 1976.

In 1978, Peck traveled to Alabama, the setting of "To Kill a Mockingbird", to campaign for Democratic U.S. Senate nominee Donald W. Stewart of Anniston, who defeated the Republican candidate, James D. Martin, a former U.S. representative from Gadsden.

In 1987, Peck undertook the voice-overs for television commercials opposing President Reagan's Supreme Court nomination of conservative judge Robert Bork. Bork's nomination was defeated. Peck was also a vocal supporter of a worldwide ban of nuclear weapons, and a lifelong advocate of gun control.

In October 1942, Peck married Finnish-born Greta Kukkonen (1911–2008), with whom he had three sons, Jonathan (1944–1975), Stephen (b. 1946), and Carey Paul (b. 1949). They were divorced on December 31, 1955.

During his marriage with Greta, Peck had a brief affair with "Spellbound" co-star Ingrid Bergman. He confessed the affair to Brad Darrach of "People" in a 1987 interview, saying "All I can say is that I had a real love for her (Bergman), and I think that's where I ought to stop... I was young. She was young. We were involved for weeks in close and intense work."

On New Year's Day in 1956, the day after his divorce was finalized, Peck married Veronique Passani (1932–2012), a Paris news reporter who had interviewed him in 1952 before he went to Italy to film "Roman Holiday". He asked her to lunch six months later and they became inseparable. They had a son, Anthony Peck (b. 1956), and a daughter, Cecilia Peck (b. 1958). The couple remained married until Gregory Peck's death. His son Anthony is an ex-husband of supermodel Cheryl Tiegs. His daughter Cecilia lives in Los Angeles.

Peck's eldest son, Jonathan, was found dead in his home on June 26, 1975 - which authorities believe was a suicide.

Peck had grandchildren from both marriages. One of his grandsons from his first marriage is actor Ethan Peck.

Peck owned the thoroughbred steeplechase race horse Different Class, which raced in England. The horse was favored for the 1968 Grand National but finished third. Peck was close friends with French president Jacques Chirac.

Peck was Roman Catholic and once considered entering the priesthood. Later in his career, a journalist asked Peck if he was a practicing Catholic. Peck answered, "I am a Roman Catholic. Not a fanatic, but I practice enough to keep the franchise. I don't always agree with the Pope... there are issues that concern me, like abortion, contraception, the ordination of women...and others." His second marriage was performed by a justice of the peace, not by a priest, because the Church prohibits remarriage if a former spouse is still living and the first marriage was not annulled. Peck was a significant fundraiser for a priest friend of his (Father Albert O'Hara), and served as co-producer of a cassette recording of the New Testament with his son Stephen.
On June 12, 2003, Peck died in his sleep at home from bronchopneumonia at the age of 87. His wife, Veronique, was by his side.

Gregory Peck is entombed in the Cathedral of Our Lady of the Angels mausoleum in Los Angeles. His eulogy was read by Brock Peters, whose character, Tom Robinson, was defended by Peck's Atticus Finch in "To Kill a Mockingbird". The celebrities who attended Peck's funeral included Lauren Bacall, Sidney Poitier, Harry Belafonte, Shari Belafonte, Harrison Ford, Calista Flockhart, Mike Farrell, Shelley Fabares, Jimmy Smits, Louis Jourdan, Dyan Cannon, Stephanie Zimbalist, Michael York, Angie Dickinson, Larry Gelbart, Michael Jackson, Anjelica Huston, Lionel Richie, Louise Fletcher, Tony Danza, and Piper Laurie.

Peck was nominated for five Academy Awards, winning once. He was nominated for "The Keys of the Kingdom" (1945), "The Yearling" (1946), "Gentleman's Agreement" (1947), and "Twelve O'Clock High" (1949). He won the Academy Award for Best Actor for his role as Atticus Finch in the 1962 film "To Kill a Mockingbird". In 1968, he received the Academy's Jean Hersholt Humanitarian Award.

Peck also received many Golden Globe awards. He won in 1947 for "The Yearling", in 1963 for "To Kill a Mockingbird", and in 1999 for the TV miniseries "Moby Dick". He was nominated in 1978 for "The Boys from Brazil". He received the Cecil B. DeMille Award in 1969, and was given the Henrietta Award in 1951 and 1955 for "World Film Favorite – Male".

In 1969, 36th U.S. President Lyndon B. Johnson honored Peck with the Presidential Medal of Freedom, the nation's highest civilian honor. In 1971, the Screen Actors Guild presented Peck with the SAG Life Achievement Award. In 1989, the American Film Institute gave Peck the AFI Life Achievement Award. He received the Crystal Globe award for outstanding artistic contribution to world cinema in 1996.

He received the Career Achievement Award from the U.S. National Board of Review of Motion Pictures in 1983.

In 1986, Peck was honored alongside actress Gene Tierney with the first Donostia Lifetime Achievement Award at the San Sebastian Film Festival in Spain for their body of work.

In 1987, Peck was awarded the George Eastman Award, given by George Eastman House for distinguished contribution to the art of film.

In 1993, Peck was awarded with an Honorary Golden Bear at the 43rd Berlin International Film Festival.

In 1998, he was awarded the National Medal of Arts.

In 2000, Peck was made a Doctor of Letters by the National University of Ireland. He was a founding patron of the University College Dublin School of Film, where he persuaded Martin Scorsese to become an honorary patron. Peck was also chairman of the American Cancer Society for a short time.

For his contribution to the motion picture industry, Gregory Peck has a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame at 6100 Hollywood Boulevard. In November 2005, the star was stolen, and has since been replaced.

On April 28, 2011, a ceremony was held in Beverly Hills, California, celebrating the first day of issue of a U.S. postage stamp commemorating Peck. The stamp is the 17th commemorative stamp in the "Legends of Hollywood" series.

On April 5, 2016, the 100th anniversary of Peck's birth, Turner Classic Movies, cable/satellite TV channel honored the actor by showing several of his films.

The moving image collection of Gregory Peck is held at the Academy Film Archive. The film material at the Academy Film Archive is complemented by material in the Gregory Peck papers at the Academy’s Margaret Herrick Library.





</doc>
<doc id="46165" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46165" title="Charlton Heston">
Charlton Heston

Charlton Heston (born John Charles Carter; October 4, 1923 – April 5, 2008) was an American actor and political activist.

As a Hollywood star, he appeared in 100 films over the course of 60 years. He played Moses in the epic film, "The Ten Commandments" (1956), for which he received his first nomination for the Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Motion Picture Drama. He also starred in "Touch of Evil" (1958) with Orson Welles, "Ben-Hur" (1959), for which he won the Academy Award for Best Actor, "El Cid" (1961), and "Planet of the Apes" (1968). He also starred in the films "The Greatest Show on Earth" (1952), "Secret of the Incas" (1954), "The Big Country" (1958) and "The Greatest Story Ever Told" (1965).

A supporter of Democratic politicians and civil rights in the 1960s, Heston later became a Republican, founding a conservative political action committee and supporting Ronald Reagan. Heston's most famous role in politics came as the five-term president of the National Rifle Association, from 1998 to 2003. After being diagnosed with Alzheimer's disease in 2003, he retired from both acting and the NRA presidency. Heston died on April 5, 2008, aged 84, from pneumonia.

Charlton Heston was born on October 4, 1923, to Lilla ("née" Charlton, authentically Baine (1899-1994) and Russell Whitford Carter (1897-1966), a sawmill operator. Many sources indicate he was born in Evanston, Illinois. Heston's autobiography, however stated otherwise. Yet other sources place his birth in No Man's Land, Illinois, which usually refers to a then-unincorporated area now part of Wilmette, a wealthy Chicago suburb.

Heston said in a 1995 interview that he was not very good at remembering addresses or his early childhood. Heston was partially of Scottish descent, including from the Clan Fraser, but the majority of his ancestry was English. His earliest immigrant ancestors arrived in America from England in the 1600s. His maternal great-grandparents, and namesakes, were Englishman William Charlton and Scotswoman Mary Drysdale Charlton. They emigrated to Canada, where his grandmother, Marian Emily Charlton, was born in 1872.

In his autobiography, Heston refers to his father participating in his family's construction business. When Heston was an infant, his father's work moved the family to St. Helen, Michigan. It was a rural, heavily forested part of the state, and Heston lived an isolated yet idyllic existence, spending much time hunting and fishing in the backwoods of the area.

When Heston was 10 years old, his parents divorced after having three children. Shortly thereafter, his mother remarried and Charlton's younger sister Lilla and brother Alan moved back to Wilmette. Heston (his and his siblings' new surname) attended New Trier High School. He recalled living there:

Contradictions on paper and in an interview surround when "Charlton" became Heston's first name. The 1930 United States Census record for Richfield, Michigan, in Roscommon County, shows his name as being Charlton J. Carter at age six. Later accounts by sources and movie studio biographies say he was born John Charles Carter.

Interestingly, Charlton was his maternal grandmother Marian's maiden name, not his mother Lilla's. This is contrary to how 20th century references read and what Heston said. When Heston's maternal grandmother and his true maternal grandfather Charles Baines separated or divorced in the early 1900s, Marian (née Charlton) Baines married William Henry Lawton in 1907. Charlton Heston's mother, Lilla, and her sister May were adopted by their grandfather, and changed their last name to Charlton in order to distance themselves from their biological father, Mr. Baines. After the Carters divorced in 1933 and Lilla Carter married Chester Heston, Charlton, sister Lilla and brother Alan Carter became Heston although not legally adopted. It was thus as Charlton Heston that he appeared in his first film with younger brother Alan (small role), an adaptation of Henrik Ibsen's "Peer Gynt" (1941).

Heston was an Episcopalian, and has been described as "a spiritual man" with an "earthy flair," who "respected religious traditions" and "particularly enjoyed the historical aspects of the Christian faith."

Heston frequently recounted that while growing up in northern Michigan in a sparsely populated area, he often wandered in the forest, "acting" out characters from books he had read. Later, in high school, he enrolled in New Trier's drama program, playing in the amateur silent 16 mm film adaptation of "Peer Gynt", from the Ibsen play, by future film activist David Bradley released in 1941.

From the Winnetka Community Theatre (or the Winnetka Dramatist's Guild, as it was then known) in which he was active, he earned a drama scholarship to Northwestern University; among his acting teachers was Alvina Krause. Several years later, Heston teamed up with Bradley to produce the first sound version of William Shakespeare's "Julius Caesar", in which Heston played Mark Antony.

In 1944, Heston enlisted in the United States Army Air Forces. He served for two years as a radio operator and aerial gunner aboard a B-25 Mitchell medium bomber stationed in the Alaskan Aleutian Islands with the 77th Bombardment Squadron of the Eleventh Air Force. He reached the rank of staff sergeant.

In March 1944 Heston married Northwestern University student Lydia Marie Clarke, who was six months his senior at Grace Methodist Church in downtown Greensboro, North Carolina. That same year, he joined the military. After his rise to fame, Heston narrated for highly classified military and Department of Energy instructional films, particularly relating to nuclear weapons, and "for six years Heston [held] the nation's highest security clearance" or Q clearance." The Q clearance is similar to a DoD or DIA clearance of top secret.

After the war, Heston and Clarke lived in Hell's Kitchen, New York City, where they worked as artists' models. Seeking a way to make it in theatre, Heston and his wife Lydia decided to manage a playhouse in Asheville, North Carolina, in 1947, making $100 a week.

In 1948, they returned to New York, where Heston was offered a supporting role in a Broadway revival of Shakespeare's "Antony and Cleopatra", starring Katharine Cornell. In television, Heston played a number of roles in CBS's "Studio One", one of the most popular anthology dramas of the 1950s.

In 1949 Heston played Marc Antony in a televised production of "Julius Caesar" (1950).

Film producer Hal B. Wallis of "Casablanca" spotted Heston in a 1950 television production of "Wuthering Heights" and offered him a contract. When his wife reminded Heston they had decided to pursue theater and television, he replied, "Well, maybe just for one film to see what it's like."

Heston's first professional movie appearance was the leading role in "Dark City", a 1950 film noir produced by Hal Wallis.
His breakthrough came when Cecil B. DeMille cast him as a circus manager in "The Greatest Show on Earth", which was named by the Motion Picture Academy as the best picture of 1952. It was also the most popular movie of that year.

King Vidor used Heston in a melodrama with Jennifer Jones, "Ruby Gentry" (1952). He followed it with a Western at Paramount, "The Savage" (1952), playing a white man raised by Indians. 20th Century Fox used him to play Andrew Jackson in "The President's Lady" (1953) opposite Susan Hayward. Back at Paramount he was Buffalo Bill in "Pony Express" (1953). He followed this with another Western, "Arrowhead" (1953).

In 1953, Heston was Billy Wilder's first choice to play Sefton in "Stalag 17". However, the role was given to William Holden, who won an Oscar for it. Hal Wallis reunited Heston with Lizabeth Scott in a melodrama "Bad for Each Other" (1953).

In 1954, he made two adventure films for Paramount. "The Naked Jungle" had him battle a plague of killer ants. He played the lead in "Secret of the Incas", which was shot on location at the archeological site Machu Picchu and had numerous similarities to "Raiders of the Lost Ark". Filmed a quarter-century before the latter film, ""Incas"" included a tomb scene with the revelatory shaft of light pointing out a clue on a map and featured Heston's roguish antiquities thief's costume and light beard; "Raiders&apos;" costume designer Deborah Nadoolman Landis noted that it was "almost a shot for shot similar" to the film on which she worked.

Heston played William Clark, the explorer, in "The Far Horizons" (1955) alongside Fred MacMurray. He tried a comedy "The Private War of Major Benson" (1955) at Universal, then supported Jane Wyman in a drama "Lucy Gallant" (1955).

Heston became an icon for playing Moses in the hugely successful biblical epic "The Ten Commandments" (1956), selected by director Cecil B. DeMille, who thought Heston bore an uncanny resemblance to Michelangelo's statue of Moses. DeMille cast Heston's three-month-old son, Fraser Clarke Heston, as the infant Moses. "The Ten Commandments" became one of the greatest box office successes of all time and is the seventh highest-grossing film adjusted for inflation. His portrayal of the Hebrew prophet and deliverer was praised by film critics. "The Hollywood Reporter" described him as "splendid, handsome and princely (and human) in the scenes dealing with him as a young man, and majestic and terrible as his role demands it." "The New York Daily News" wrote that he "is remarkably effective as both the young, princely Moses and as the Patriarchal savior of his people." His performance as Moses earned him his first nomination for the Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Motion Picture Drama and Spain's Fotogramas de Plata Award for Best Foreign Performer.
Heston went back to Westerns with "Three Violent People" (1957). Universal tried to interest him in a thriller starring Orson Welles, "Touch of Evil"; Heston agreed to be in it if Welles directed. The film has come to be regarded as a classic. He also played a rare supporting role in William Wyler's "The Big Country" opposite Gregory Peck and Burl Ives.

Heston got another chance to play Andrew Jackson in "The Buccaneer" (1958), produced by De Mille and starring Yul Brynner.

After Marlon Brando, Burt Lancaster, and Rock Hudson turned down the title role in "Ben-Hur" (1959), Heston accepted the role, winning the Academy Award for Best Actor, one of the unprecedented 11 Oscars the film earned. After Moses and "Ben-Hur", Heston became more identified with Biblical epics than any other actor. He later voiced Ben-Hur in an animated television production of the Lew Wallace in 2003.

Heston followed it with "The Wreck of the Mary Deare" (1959) co-starring Gary Cooper, which was a box office disappointment.

Heston turned down the lead opposite Marilyn Monroe in "Let's Make Love" to appear in Benn W. Levy's play "The Tumbler", directed by Laurence Olivier. Called a "harrowingly pretentious verse drama" by "Time", the production went through a troubled out-of-town tryout period in Boston and closed after five performances on Broadway in February 1960. Heston, a great admirer of Olivier the actor, took on the play to work with him as a director. After the play flopped, Heston told columnist Joe Hyams, "I feel I am the only one who came out with a profit... I got out of it precisely what I went in for – a chance to work with Olivier. I learned from him in six weeks things I never would have learned otherwise. I think I've ended up a better actor."

Heston enjoyed acting on stage, believing it revivified him as an actor. He never returned to Broadway, but acted in regional theatres. His most frequent stage roles included the title role in "Macbeth", and Mark Antony in both "Julius Caesar" and "Antony and Cleopatra". He played Sir Thomas More in "A Man for All Seasons" in several regional productions in the 1970s and 1980s, eventually playing it in London's West End. The play was a success and the West End production was taken to Aberdeen, Scotland, for a week, where it was staged at His Majesty's Theatre. 

Samuel Bronston pursued Heston to play the title role in an epic shot in Spain, "El Cid" (1961), which was a big success. He was in a war film for Paramount, "The Pigeon That Took Rome" (1962), and a melodrama shot in Hawaii, "Diamond Head" (1963). Bronston wanted him for another epic and the result was "55 Days at Peking" (1963), which was a box office disappointment.

Heston focused on epics: he was John the Baptist in "The Greatest Story Ever Told" (1965); Michelangelo in "The Agony and the Ecstasy" (1965) opposite Rex Harrison; the title role in "Major Dundee" (1965), directed by Sam Peckinpah. "The War Lord" (1965), directed by Franklin J. Schaffner, was on a smaller scale and critically acclaimed, though it fared poor commercially. In "Khartoum" (1966) Heston played General Charles Gordon.

From 1965–71, Heston served as president of the Screen Actors Guild. The Guild had been created in 1933 for the benefit of actors, who had different interests from the producers and directors who controlled the Academy of Motion Pictures Arts and Sciences. He was more conservative than most actors, and publicly clashed with outspoken liberal actors such as Ed Asner.

"Counterpoint" (1968) was a war film which was not particularly successful at the box office. Neither was the Western "Will Penny" (1968), directed by Tom Griesi; however Heston received excellent reviews and it was one of his favorite films.

Heston had not been in a big hit for a number of years but in 1968 he starred in "Planet of the Apes", directed by Schaffner, which was hugely popular. Less so was a football drama, "Number One" (1969) directed by Gries. Heston had a smaller supporting role in "Beneath the Planet of the Apes" (1970), which was popular. However, "The Hawaiians" (1970), directed by Gries, was not.

In 1970, he portrayed Mark Antony again in another film version of Shakespeare's " Julius Caesar". His co-stars included Jason Robards as Brutus, Richard Chamberlain as Octavius, Robert Vaughn as Casca, and English actors Richard Johnson as Cassius, John Gielgud as Caesar, and Diana Rigg as Portia.
In 1971, he starred in the post-apocalyptic science-fiction film "The Omega Man", which has received mixed critical reviews but was popular.

In 1972, Heston made his directorial debut and starred as Mark Antony in an adaptation of the William Shakespeare play he had performed earlier in his theater career, "Antony and Cleopatra". Hildegarde Neil was Cleopatra and English actor Eric Porter was Ahenobarbus. After receiving scathing reviews, the film was never released to theaters, and is rarely seen on television. It was finally released on DVD in March 2011.

His next film, "Skyjacked" (1972) was a hit. However "The Call of the Wild" (1972) was a flop, one of Heston's least favorite films. He quickly recovered with a string of hits: "Soylent Green" (1973), another science fiction story; "The Three Musketeers" (1973), playing Cardinal Richelieu in an all-star cast; "Earthquake" (1974), a disaster film; "Airport 1975" (1975), another disaster film; "Midway" (1976) a war film.

Heston's good run at the box office ended with "Two-Minute Warning" (1976), a disaster film, and "The Last Hard Men" (1976), a Western. He played King Henry VIII for "The Prince and the Pauper" (1977), from the "Musketeers" team, then starred in a disaster film, "Gray Lady Down" (1978).

Heston was in a Western written by his son, "The Mountain Men" (1980) and a horror film, "The Awakening" (1980). He made his second film as a director "Mother Lode" (1982) also written by his son; it was a commercial disappointment.

From 1985-87, he starred in his only prime time stint on a television series in the soap, "The Colbys". With his son Fraser, he produced and starred in several TV movies, including remakes of "Treasure Island" and "A Man For All Seasons". In 1992, Heston appeared on the A&E cable network in a short series of videos, "Charlton Heston Presents the Bible", reading passages from the King James version.

Never taking himself too seriously, he also made a few appearances as "Chuck" in Dame Edna Everage's shows, both on stage and on television. Heston appeared in 1993 in a cameo role in "Wayne's World 2", in a scene where Wayne Campbell (Mike Myers) requests casting a better actor for a small role. After the scene is reshot with Heston, Campbell weeps in awe. That same year, Heston hosted "Saturday Night Live". He had cameos in the films "Hamlet", "Tombstone", and "True Lies".

He starred in many theatre productions at the Los Angeles Music Center, where he appeared in "Detective Story" and "The Caine Mutiny Court Martial," and as Sherlock Holmes in "The Crucifer of Blood", opposite Richard Johnson as Dr. Watson. In 2001, he made a cameo appearance as an elderly, dying chimpanzee in Tim Burton's remake of "Planet of the Apes". His last film role was as Josef Mengele in "My Father, Rua Alguem 5555", which had limited release (mainly to festivals) in 2003.

Heston's distinctive voice landed him roles as a film narrator, including "Armageddon" and Disney's "Hercules". He played the title role in "Mister Roberts" three times and cited it as one of his favorite roles. In the early 1990s, he tried unsuccessfully to revive and direct the show with Tom Selleck in the title role. In 1998, Heston had a cameo role playing himself in the American television series "Friends", in the episode "The One with Joey's Dirty Day".

Heston's political activism had four stages. In the first stage, 1955–61, he endorsed Democratic candidates for President, and signed on to petitions and liberal political causes. From 1961–72, the second stage, he continued to endorse Democratic candidates for President. Moving beyond Hollywood, he became nationally visible in 1963 in support of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. From 1965–71, he served as the elected president of the Screen Actors Guild, and clashed with his liberal rival Ed Asner. In 1968, he used his "cowboy" persona to publicize gun control measures.

The third stage began in 1972. Like many neoconservatives of the same era who moved from liberal Democrat to conservative Republican, he rejected the liberalism of George McGovern and supported Richard Nixon in 1972 for President. In the 1980s, he gave strong support to Ronald Reagan during his conservative presidency. In 1995, Heston entered his fourth stage by establishing his own political action fund-raising committee, and jumped into the internal politics of the National Rifle Association. He gave numerous culture wars speeches and interviews upholding the conservative position, blaming media and academia for imposing affirmative action, which he saw as unfair reverse discrimination.

Heston campaigned for Presidential candidate Adlai Stevenson in 1956, although he was unable to campaign for John F. Kennedy in 1960 due to filming on "El Cid" in Spain. Reportedly, when in 1961 a segregated Oklahoma movie theater was showing his movie "El Cid" for the first time, he joined a picket line outside. Heston made no reference to this in his autobiography but describes traveling to Oklahoma City to picket segregated restaurants, to the chagrin of the producers of "El Cid", Allied Artists. During the March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom held in Washington, DC, in 1963, he accompanied Martin Luther King, Jr. In later speeches, he said he helped the civil rights cause "long before Hollywood found it fashionable."

In the 1964 election, he endorsed Lyndon Baines Johnson, who had masterminded the passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 through Congress over the vociferous opposition of Southern Democrats. That year, Heston publicly opposed California Proposition 14 that rolled back the state's fair housing law, the Rumford Fair Housing Act.

In his 1995 autobiography, "In the Arena", written after he became a conservative Republican, Heston wrote that while driving back from the set of "The War Lord", he saw a "Barry Goldwater for President" billboard with his campaign slogan "In Your Heart You Know He's Right" and thought to himself, "Son of a bitch, he is right." Heston later said that his support for Goldwater was the event that helped turn him against gun control laws. Following the assassination of Senator Robert F. Kennedy in 1968, Heston, Gregory Peck, Kirk Douglas, and James Stewart issued a statement in support of President Johnson's Gun Control Act of 1968. The Johnson White House had solicited Heston's support. He endorsed Hubert Humphrey in the 1968 Presidential election.

Heston opposed the Vietnam War during its course (though he changed his opinion in the years following the war) and in 1969 was approached by the Democratic Party to run for the U.S. Senate against incumbent George Murphy. He agonized over the decision but ultimately determined he could never give up acting. He is reported to have voted for Richard Nixon in 1972, though Nixon is not mentioned in his autobiography.

By the 1980s, Heston supported gun rights and changed his political affiliation from Democratic to Republican. When asked why he changed political alliances, Heston replied "I didn't change. The Democratic Party changed." In 1987, he first registered as a Republican. He campaigned for Republicans and Republican Presidents Ronald Reagan, George H.W. Bush, and George W. Bush.

Heston resigned in protest from Actors Equity, saying the union's refusal to allow a white actor to play a Eurasian role in "Miss Saigon" was "obscenely racist".

Heston charged that CNN's telecasts from Baghdad were "sowing doubts" about the allied effort in the 1990–91 Gulf War."

At a Time Warner stockholders' meeting, Heston castigated the company for releasing an Ice-T album which included a song "Cop Killer" about killing police officers. While filming "The Savage", Heston was initiated by blood into the Miniconjou Lakota Nation, saying that he had no natural American Indian heritage, but elected to be "Native American" to salvage the term from exclusively referring to American Indians.

In 1993, Heston teamed up with John Anthony West and Robert M. Schoch in an Emmy Award-winning NBC special, "The Mystery of the Sphinx". West and Schoch had proposed a much earlier date for the construction of the Great Sphinx than generally accepted. They had suggested that the main type of weathering evident on the Great Sphinx and surrounding enclosure walls could only have been caused by prolonged and extensive rainfall and that the whole structure was carved out of limestone bedrock by an ancient advanced culture (such as the Heavy Neolithic Qaraoun culture).

In a 1997 speech called "Fighting the Culture War in America", Heston rhetorically deplored a culture war he said was being conducted by a generation of media people, educators, entertainers, and politicians against:... the God fearing, law-abiding, Caucasian, middle-class Protestant – or even worse, evangelical Christian, Midwestern or Southern – or even worse, rural, apparently straight – or even worse, admitted heterosexuals, gun owning – or even worse, NRA-card-carrying, average working stiff – or even worse, male working stiff – because, not only don’t you count, you are a down-right obstacle to social progress. Your voice deserves a lower decibel level, your opinion is less enlightened, your media access is insignificant; and frankly, mister, you need to wake up, wise up, and learn a little something from your new America; and until you do, would you mind shutting up?

He went on to say:The Constitution was handed down to guide us by a bunch of wise old dead white guys who invented our country! Now some flinch when I say that. Why! It's true-they were white guys! So were most of the guys that died in Lincoln's name opposing slavery in the 1860s. So why should I be ashamed of white guys? Why is "Hispanic Pride" or "Black Pride" a good thing, while "White Pride" conjures shaven heads and white hoods? Why was the Million Man March on Washington celebrated by many as progress, while the Promise Keepers March on Washington was greeted with suspicion and ridicule? I'll tell you why: Cultural warfare!

In an address to students at Harvard Law School entitled "Winning the Cultural War", Heston said, "If Americans believed in political correctness, we'd still be King George's boys – subjects bound to the British crown."
He said to the students:You are the best and the brightest. You, here in this fertile cradle of American academia, here in the castle of learning on the Charles River. You are the cream. But I submit that you and your counterparts across the land are the most socially conformed and politically silenced generation since Concord Bridge. And as long as you validate that and abide it, you are, by your grandfathers' standards, cowards.

During a speech at Brandeis University, he stated, "Political correctness is tyranny with manners". In a speech to the National Press Club in 1997, Heston said, "Now, I doubt any of you would prefer a rolled up newspaper as a weapon against a dictator or a criminal intruder."

Heston was the president (a largely ceremonial position) and spokesman of the NRA from 1998 until he resigned in 2003. At the 2000 NRA convention, he raised a rifle over his head and declared that a potential Al Gore administration would take away his Second Amendment rights "from my cold, dead hands". In announcing his resignation in 2003, he again raised a rifle over his head, repeating the five famous words of his 2000 speech. Heston became an honorary life member.

In the 2002 film "Bowling for Columbine", Michael Moore interviewed Heston at Heston's home, asking him about an April 1999 meeting the NRA held in Denver, Colorado, shortly after the Columbine high school massacre. Moore criticized Heston for the perceived thoughtlessness in the timing and location of the meeting. When Moore asked Heston for his thoughts on why gun-related homicide is so much higher in the United States than in other countries, Heston said it was because, "we have probably more mixed ethnicity" and/or that "we have a history of violence, perhaps more than most countries." Heston subsequently, on-camera, excused himself and walked away. Moore was later criticized for having conducted the interview in what some viewed as an ambush. The interview was conducted early in 2001, before Heston publicly announced his Alzheimer's diagnosis, but the film was released afterward, causing some to say that Moore should have cut the interview from the final film.

In April 2003, he sent a message of support to the American forces in the Iraq war, attacking opponents of the war as "pretend patriots".

Heston opposed abortion and introduced Bernard Nathanson's 1987 pro-life documentary, "Eclipse of Reason", which focuses on late-term abortions. Heston served on the advisory board of Accuracy in Media, a conservative media watchdog group founded by Reed Irvine.

In 1996, Heston had a hip replacement. He was diagnosed with prostate cancer in 1998. Following a course of radiation treatment, the cancer went into remission. In 2000, he publicly disclosed that he had been treated for alcoholism at a Utah clinic in May–June of that year.
On August 9, 2002, he publicly announced (via a taped message) that he had been diagnosed with symptoms consistent with Alzheimer's disease. In July 2003, in his final public appearance, Heston received the Presidential Medal of Freedom at the White House from President George W. Bush. In March 2005, various newspapers reported that family and friends were shocked by the progression of his illness, and that he was sometimes unable to get out of bed.

Heston died on the morning of April 5, 2008, at his home in Beverly Hills, California, with Lydia, his wife of 64 years, by his side. He was also survived by their son, Fraser Clarke Heston, and adopted daughter, Holly Ann Heston. The cause of death was not disclosed by the family. A month later, media outlets reported his death was due to pneumonia. Heston's family released a statement:

Early tributes came in from leading figures; President George W. Bush called Heston "a man of character and integrity, with a big heart ... He served his country during World War II, marched in the civil rights movement, led a labor union and vigorously defended Americans’ Second Amendment rights." Former First Lady Nancy Reagan said that she was "heartbroken" over Heston's death and released a statement, reading, "I will never forget Chuck as a hero on the big screen in the roles he played, but more importantly I considered him a hero in life for the many times that he stepped up to support Ronnie in whatever he was doing."

Heston's funeral was held a week later on April 12, 2008, in a ceremony which was attended by 250 people including Nancy Reagan and Hollywood stars such as California Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger, Olivia de Havilland, Keith Carradine, Pat Boone, Tom Selleck, Oliver Stone (who had cast Heston in his 1999 movie "Any Given Sunday"), Rob Reiner, and Christian Bale.

The funeral was held at Episcopal Parish of St. Matthew's Church in Pacific Palisades, the church where Heston regularly worshipped and attended Sunday services since the early 1980s. He was cremated and his ashes were given to his family.

Richard Corliss wrote in "Time" magazine, "From start to finish, Heston was a grand, ornery anachronism, the sinewy symbol of a time when Hollywood took itself seriously, when heroes came from history books, not comic books. Epics like "Ben-Hur" or "El Cid" simply couldn't be made today, in part because popular culture has changed as much as political fashion. But mainly because there's no one remotely like Charlton Heston to infuse the form with his stature, fire, and guts."

In his obituary for the actor, film critic Roger Ebert noted, "Heston made at least three movies that almost everybody eventually sees: "Ben-Hur", "The Ten Commandments" and "Planet of the Apes"."

Heston's cinematic legacy was the subject of "Cinematic Atlas: The Triumphs of Charlton Heston", an 11-film retrospective by the Film Society of the Lincoln Center that was shown at the Walter Reade Theatre from August 29 to September 4, 2008.

On April 17, 2010, Heston was inducted into the National Cowboy and Western Heritage Museum's Hall of Great Western Performers.

In his childhood hometown of St. Helen, Michigan, a charter school, Charlton Heston Academy, opened on September 4, 2012. It is housed in the former St. Helen Elementary School. Enrollment on the first day was 220 students in grades kindergarten through eighth.

Charlton Heston was commemorated on a United States postage stamp issued on April 11, 2014.

Charlton Heston was inducted as a Laureate of the Lincoln Academy of Illinois and awarded the Order of Lincoln (the State’s highest honor) by the Governor of Illinois in 1977 in the area of Performing Arts.

by Heston:



 


</doc>
<doc id="106405" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=106405" title="Emil Jannings">
Emil Jannings

Emil Jannings (23 July 1884 – 2 January 1950) was a German actor, popular in 1920s film in Hollywood. He was the first Oscar recipient, honored with the Academy Award for Best Actor at the 1929 ceremony. To date, he is still the only German to have won the Best Actor Oscar.

Jannings is best known for his collaborations with F.W. Murnau and Josef von Sternberg, including 1930's "The Blue Angel", with Marlene Dietrich. "Der blaue Engel" was meant as a vehicle for Jannings to score a place for himself in the new medium of sound film, but Dietrich stole the show. Jannings later starred in a number of Nazi propaganda films, which made him unemployable as an actor after the fall of the Third Reich.

He was christened Theodor Friedrich Emil Janenz in Rorschach, Switzerland, the son of Emil Janenz, an American businessman from St. Louis, and his wife Margarethe ("née" Schwabe), originally from Germany. Jannings held German citizenship; while he was still young the family moved to Leipzig in the German Empire and further to Görlitz after the early death of his father.

Jannings ran away from school and went to sea. When he returned to Görlitz, his mother finally allowed him to begin a traineeship at the town state theatre, where Jannings started his stage career. From 1901 onwards he worked with several theatre companies in Bremen, Nuremberg, Leipzig, Königsberg, and Glogau before joining the Deutsches Theater ensemble under director Max Reinhardt in Berlin. Permanently employed since 1915, Jannings met with playwright Karl Vollmöller, fellow actor Ernst Lubitsch, and photographer Frieda Riess, who after World War I all were at the heart of the Weimar Culture in 1920s Berlin. Jannings made his breakthrough in 1918 with his role as Judge Adam in Kleist's "Broken Jug" at the Schauspielhaus.

Jannings was a theater actor who went into films, though he remained dissatisfied with the limited expressive possibilities in the silent era. Having signed a contract with the UFA production company, he starred in "Die Augen der Mumie Ma" ("The Eyes of the Mummy", 1918) and "Madame DuBarry" (1919), both with Pola Negri in the main female part. He also performed in the 1922 film version of "Othello" and in F. W. Murnau's "The Last Laugh" ("Der Letzte Mann", 1924), as a proud but aged hotel doorman who is demoted to a restroom attendant. Jannings worked with Murnau on two other films, playing the title character in "Herr Tartüff" (1925), and as Mephistopheles in "Faust" (1926).

His increasing popularity enabled Jannings to sign an agreement with Paramount Pictures and eventually follow his acting colleagues Lubitsch and Negri to Hollywood. He started his career in 1927 with "The Way of All Flesh" directed by Victor Fleming (now lost) and in the following year performed in Josef von Sternberg's "The Last Command". In 1929 Jannings won the first Best Actor Oscar for his work in both films. He and Sternberg also cooperated in "Street of Sin" (1928), though they actually differed about Jannings' acting in front of the camera.

His Hollywood career came to an end with the advent of talkies as his thick German accent was difficult to understand. His dialogue was initially dubbed by another actor in the part-talkie "The Patriot" (1928) directed by Ernst Lubitsch, although Jannings' own voice was restored after he objected. Returning to Europe, he starred opposite Marlene Dietrich in the 1930 film "The Blue Angel", which was filmed simultaneously in English with its German version "Der blaue Engel".

According to Susan Orlean, author of "Rin Tin Tin: The Life and The Legend" (Simon and Schuster, 2011), Jannings was not actually the winner of the first best actor vote, but the runner-up. While researching her book, Orlean discovered that it was in fact Rin Tin Tin, the German Shepherd dog, one of the biggest movie stars of his time, who won the vote. The Academy, however, worried about not being taken seriously if they gave the first Oscar to a dog, chose to award the Oscar to the human runner-up.

In 1960, Jannings was honored with a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame at 1630 Vine Street for his contribution to motion pictures.

After the Nazi "Machtergreifung" in 1933, Jannings continued his career in the service of Nazi cinema. During the Third Reich, he starred in several films which were intended to promote Nazism, particularly the "Führerprinzip" by presenting unyielding historical characters, such as "Der alte und der junge König" ("The Old and the Young King" 1934), "Der Herrscher" ("The Ruler" 1937) directed by Veit Harlan, "Robert Koch" (1939), "Ohm Krüger" ("Uncle Kruger", 1941) and "Die Entlassung" ("Bismarck's Dismissal", 1942). He also performed in his famed role in "The Broken Jug" directed by Gustav Ucicky. Minister of Propaganda Joseph Goebbels named Jannings an "Artist of the State" ("Staatsschauspieler") 

The shooting of his last film "Wo ist Herr Belling?" was aborted, when troops of the Allied Powers entered Germany in Spring 1945. Jannings reportedly carried his Oscar statuette with him as proof of his former association with Hollywood. However, his active role in Nazi propaganda meant that he was subject to denazification, and a comeback attempt would not be legal.

Ironically, in the same period Dietrich became a US citizen and an influential anti-Nazi activist, spending much of the war entertaining troops on the front lines and broadcasting on behalf of the OSS. Dietrich particularly loathed Jannings for his Nazi ties, and would later refer to her former co-star as a "ham".

Jannings retired to Strobl near Salzburg, Austria, and became an Austrian citizen in 1947. He died in 1950, aged 65, from liver cancer. He is buried in the St. Wolfgang cemetery. His Best Actor Oscar is now on display at the Berlin Filmmuseum.

Jannings was married four times. His first three marriages ended in divorce, his last with his death. His last three marriages were to German stage and film actresses, Hanna Ralph, Lucie Höflich and Gussy Holl.






</doc>
<doc id="46228" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46228" title="Henry Fonda">
Henry Fonda

Henry Jaynes Fonda (May 16, 1905 – August 12, 1982) was an American film and stage actor with a career spanning five decades.

Fonda made his mark early as a Broadway actor. He also appeared in 1938 in plays performed in White Plains, New York, with Joan Tompkins. He made his Hollywood debut in 1935, and his career gained momentum after his Academy Award-nominated performance as Tom Joad in "The Grapes of Wrath", a 1940 adaptation of John Steinbeck's novel about an Oklahoma family who moved west during the Dust Bowl. 

Throughout five decades in Hollywood, Fonda cultivated a strong, appealing screen image in such classics as "The Ox-Bow Incident", "Mister Roberts", and "12 Angry Men". Later, Fonda moved both toward darker epics such as Sergio Leone's "Once Upon a Time in the West" and lighter roles in family comedies such as "Yours, Mine and Ours" with Lucille Ball, winning the Academy Award for Best Actor at the 54th Academy Awards for the movie "On Golden Pond", his final film role.

Fonda was the patriarch of a family of famous actors, including daughter Jane Fonda, son Peter Fonda, granddaughter Bridget Fonda, and grandson Troy Garity. His family and close friends called him "Hank". In 1999, he was named the sixth-Greatest Male Star of All Time by the American Film Institute.

Born in Grand Island, Nebraska in May 1905, Henry Jaynes Fonda was the son of printer William Brace Fonda, and his wife, Herberta (Jaynes). The family moved to Omaha, Nebraska in 1906.

Fonda's patrilineal line originates with an ancestor from Genoa, Italy, who migrated to the Netherlands in the 15th century. In 1642, a branch of the Fonda family immigrated to the Dutch colony of New Netherland on the East Coast of North America. They were among the first Dutch population to settle in what is now upstate New York, establishing the town of Fonda, New York. By 1888, many of their descendants had relocated to Nebraska.

Fonda was brought up as a Christian Scientist, though he was baptized an Episcopalian at St. Stephen's Episcopal Church in Grand Island. He said, "My whole damn family was nice." They were a close family and highly supportive, especially in health matters, as they avoided doctors due to their religion. Despite having a religious background, he later became an agnostic. Fonda was a bashful, short boy who tended to avoid girls, except his sisters, and was a good skater, swimmer, and runner. He worked part-time in his father's print plant and imagined a possible career as a journalist. Later, he worked after school for the phone company. He also enjoyed drawing. Fonda was active in the Boy Scouts of America; Teichmann reports that he reached the rank of Eagle Scout. However, this is denied elsewhere. When he was about 14, his father took him to observe the lynching of a young black man accused of rape. This enraged the young Fonda and he kept a keen awareness of prejudice for the rest of his life. By his senior year in high school, Fonda had grown to more than six feet tall, but remained shy. He attended the University of Minnesota, where he majored in journalism, but he did not graduate. He took a job with the Retail Credit Company.

At age 20, Fonda started his acting career at the Omaha Community Playhouse, when his mother's friend Dodie Brando (mother of Marlon Brando) recommended that he try out for a juvenile part in "You and I", in which he was cast as Ricky. He was fascinated by the stage, learning everything from set construction to stage production, and embarrassed by his acting ability. When he received the lead in "Merton of the Movies", he realized the beauty of acting as a profession, as it allowed him to deflect attention from his own tongue-tied personality and create stage characters relying on someone else's scripted words. Fonda decided to quit his job and go east in 1928 to seek his fortune.

He arrived on Cape Cod and played a minor role at the Cape Playhouse in Dennis, Massachusetts. A friend took him to Falmouth, MA where he joined and quickly became a valued member of the University Players, an intercollegiate summer stock company. There he worked with Margaret Sullavan, his future wife. James Stewart joined the Players a few months after Fonda left, though they were soon to become lifelong friends. Fonda left the Players at the end of their 1931-1932 season after appearing in his first professional role in "The Jest", by Sem Benelli. Joshua Logan, a young sophomore at Princeton who had been double-cast in the show, gave Fonda the part of Tornaquinci, "an elderly Italian man with a long white beard and even longer hair." Also in the cast of "The Jest" with Fonda and Logan were Bretaigne Windust, Kent Smith, and Eleanor Phelps.

The tall (6 ft, 1.5 in) Fonda headed for New York City, to be with his then wife, Margaret Sullavan. The marriage was brief, but when James Stewart came to New York his luck changed. Getting contact information from Joshua Logan, Jimmy, as he was called, found Hank Fonda and these small town boys found they had a lot in common, as long as they didn't discuss politics. The two men became roommates and honed their skills on Broadway. Fonda appeared in theatrical productions from 1926 to 1934. They fared no better than many Americans in and out of work during the Great Depression, sometimes lacking enough money to take the subway.

Fonda got his first break in films when he was hired in 1935 as Janet Gaynor's leading man in 20th Century Fox's screen adaptation of "The Farmer Takes a Wife"; he reprised his role from the Broadway production of the same name, which had gained him critical recognition. Suddenly, Fonda was making $3,000 a week and dining with Hollywood stars such as Carole Lombard. Stewart soon followed him to Hollywood, and they roomed together again, in lodgings next door to Greta Garbo. In 1935, Fonda starred in the RKO film "I Dream Too Much" with the opera star Lily Pons. "The New York Times" announced him as "Henry Fonda, the most likable of the new crop of romantic juveniles."
Fonda's film career blossomed as he costarred with Sylvia Sidney and Fred MacMurray in "The Trail of the Lonesome Pine" (1936), the first Technicolor movie filmed outdoors.

He starred with ex-wife Margaret Sullavan in "The Moon's Our Home", and a short rekindling of their relationship led to a brief but temporary consideration of remarriage. Fonda got the nod for the lead role in "You Only Live Once" (1937), also costarring Sidney, and directed by Fritz Lang. He was a critical success opposite Bette Davis, who had picked him, in the film "Jezebel" (1938). This was followed by the title role in "Young Mr. Lincoln" (1939), his first collaboration with director John Ford, and that year he played Frank James in "Jesse James" (1939). Another 1939 film was "Drums Along the Mohawk", also directed by Ford.
Fonda's successes led Ford to recruit him to play Tom Joad in the film version of John Steinbeck's novel "The Grapes of Wrath" (1940). A reluctant Darryl Zanuck, who preferred Tyrone Power, insisted on Fonda's signing a seven-year contract with his studio, Twentieth Century-Fox. Fonda agreed and was ultimately nominated for an Academy Award for his work in the film, which many consider to be his finest role. Fonda starred in "The Return of Frank James" (1940) with Gene Tierney. He then played opposite Barbara Stanwyck in Preston Sturges' "The Lady Eve" (1941), and again teamed with Tierney in the successful screwball comedy "Rings on Her Fingers" (1942). She was one of Fonda's favorite co-stars, and they appeared in three films together. He was acclaimed for his role in "The Ox-Bow Incident" (1943).
Fonda enlisted in the United States Navy to fight in World War II, saying, "I don't want to be in a fake war in a studio." Previously, Stewart and he had helped raise funds for the defense of Britain. Fonda served for three years, initially as a Quartermaster 3rd Class on the destroyer . He was later commissioned as a Lieutenant Junior Grade in Air Combat Intelligence in the Central Pacific and was awarded the Bronze Star Medal and Navy Presidential Unit Citation.

After the war, Fonda took a break from movies and attended Hollywood parties and enjoyed civilian life. Stewart and Fonda would listen to records and invite Johnny Mercer, Hoagy Carmichael, Dinah Shore, and Nat King Cole over for music, with the latter giving the family piano lessons. Fonda played Wyatt Earp in "My Darling Clementine" (1946), which was directed by John Ford. Fonda did seven postwar films until his contract with Fox expired, the last being Otto Preminger's "Daisy Kenyon" (1947), opposite Joan Crawford. He starred in "The Fugitive" (1947), which was the first film of Ford's new production company, Argosy Pictures. In 1948, he appeared in a subsequent Argosy/Ford production, "Fort Apache", as a rigid Army colonel, along with John Wayne and Shirley Temple in her first adult role.
Refusing another long-term studio contract, Fonda returned to Broadway, wearing his own officer's cap to originate the title role in "Mister Roberts", a comedy about the U.S. Navy, during World War II in the South Pacific Ocean where Fonda, a junior officer, Lt. Douglas A. Roberts wages a private war against a tyrannical captain. He won a 1948 Tony Award for the part. Fonda followed that by reprising his performance in the national tour and with successful stage runs in "Point of No Return" and "The Caine Mutiny Court-Martial". After an eight-year absence from films, he starred in the same role in the 1955 film version of "Mister Roberts" with James Cagney, William Powell, and Jack Lemmon, continuing a pattern of bringing his acclaimed stage roles to life on the big screen. On the set of "Mister Roberts", Fonda came to blows with director John Ford, who punched him during filming, and Fonda vowed never to work for the director again. While he kept that vow for years, Fonda spoke glowingly of Ford in Peter Bogdanovich's documentary "Directed by John Ford" and in a documentary on Ford's career alongside Ford and James Stewart. Fonda refused to participate until he learned that Ford had insisted on casting Fonda as the lead in the film version of "Mr. Roberts", reviving Fonda's film career after concentrating on the stage for years.

After "Mr. Roberts", Fonda next acted in Paramount Pictures's production of the Leo Tolstoy epic novel "War and Peace" (1956), about French Emperor Napoleon's invasion of Russia in 1812, in which he played Pierre Bezukhov opposite Audrey Hepburn; it took two years to shoot. Fonda worked with Alfred Hitchcock in 1956, playing a man falsely accused of robbery in "The Wrong Man"; the unusual semidocumentary work of Hitchcock's was based on an actual incident and partly filmed on location.

In 1957, Fonda made his first foray into producing with "12 Angry Men", in which he also starred. The film was based on a teleplay and a script by Reginald Rose, and directed by Sidney Lumet. The low-budget production was completed in 17 days of filming, mostly in one claustrophobic jury room. It had a strong cast, including also Jack Klugman, Lee J. Cobb, Martin Balsam, and E. G. Marshall. The intense story about twelve jurors deciding the fate of a young man accused of murder was well received by critics worldwide. Fonda shared the Academy Award and Golden Globe nominations with co-producer Reginald Rose, and won the 1958 BAFTA Award for Best Actor for his performance as "Juror #8". Early on, the film drew poorly, but after winning critical acclaim and awards, it proved a success. In spite of the outcome, Fonda vowed that he would never produce a movie again, fearing that failing as a producer might derail his acting career. After acting in the western movies "The Tin Star" (1957) and "Warlock" (1959), Fonda returned to the production seat for the NBC western television series "The Deputy" (1959–1961), in which he starred as Marshal Simon Fry. His co-stars were Allen Case and Read Morgan.
During the 1960s, Fonda performed in a number of war and western epics, including 1962's "The Longest Day" and the Cinerama production "How the West Was Won", 1965's "In Harm's Way", and "Battle of the Bulge". In the Cold War suspense film "Fail-Safe" (1964), Fonda played the President of the United States who tries to avert a nuclear holocaust through tense negotiations with the Soviets after American bombers are mistakenly ordered to attack the USSR. He also returned to more light-hearted cinema in "Spencer's Mountain" (1963), which was the inspiration for the 1970s TV series, "The Waltons", based on the Great Depression of the 1930s memories of Earl Hamner, Jr..

Fonda appeared against type as the villain 'Frank' in 1968's "Once Upon a Time in the West". After initially turning down the role, he was convinced to accept it by actor Eli Wallach and director Sergio Leone, who flew from Italy to the United States to persuade him to take the part. Fonda had planned on wearing a pair of brown-colored contact lenses, but Leone preferred the paradox of contrasting close-up shots of Fonda's innocent-looking blue eyes with the vicious personality of the character Fonda played.

Fonda's relationship with Jimmy Stewart survived their disagreements over politics — Fonda was a liberal Democrat, and Stewart a conservative Republican. After a heated argument, they avoided talking politics with each other. The two men teamed up for 1968's "Firecreek", where Fonda again played the heavy. In 1970, Fonda and Stewart co-starred in the western "The Cheyenne Social Club", a minor film in which they humorously argued politics. They had first appeared together on film in "On Our Merry Way" (1948), a comedy which also starred William Demarest and Fred MacMurray and featured a grown-up Carl "Alfalfa" Switzer, who had acted as a child in the "Our Gang" movie serials of the 1930s.

Despite approaching his seventies, Fonda continued to work in theater, television and film through the 1970s. In 1970, Fonda appeared in three films; the most successful was "The Cheyenne Social Club". The other two films were "Too Late the Hero", in which Fonda played a secondary role, and "There Was a Crooked Man", about Paris Pitman Jr. (played by Kirk Douglas) trying to escape from an Arizona prison.

Fonda returned to both foreign and television productions, which provided career sustenance through a decade in which many aging screen actors suffered waning careers. He starred in the ABC television series "The Smith Family" between 1971 and 1972. A TV-movie adaptation of John Steinbeck's novel, 1973's "The Red Pony", earned Fonda an Emmy nomination. After the unsuccessful Hollywood melodrama, "Ash Wednesday", he filmed three Italian productions released in 1973 and 1974. The most successful of these, "My Name is Nobody", presented Fonda in a rare comedic performance as an old gunslinger whose plans to retire are dampened by a "fan" of sorts.

Fonda continued stage acting throughout his last years, including several demanding roles in Broadway plays. He returned to Broadway in 1974 for the biographical drama, "Clarence Darrow", for which he was nominated for a Tony Award. Fonda's health had been deteriorating for years, but his first outward symptoms occurred after a performance of the play in April 1974, when he collapsed from exhaustion. After the appearance of a cardiac arrhythmia brought on by prostate cancer, he had a pacemaker installed following cancer surgery. Fonda returned to the play in 1975. After the run of a 1978 play, "First Monday of October", he took the advice of his doctors and quit plays, though he continued to star in films and television.

Fonda appeared in a revival of "The Time of Your Life" that opened in March 17, 1972, at the Huntington Hartford Theater in Los Angeles, where Fonda, Richard Dreyfuss, Gloria Grahame, Ron Thompson, Strother Martin, Jane Alexander, Lewis J. Stadlen, Richard X. Slattery, and Pepper Martin were among the cast with Edwin Sherin directing.

In 1976, Fonda appeared in several notable television productions, the first being "Collision Course", the story of the volatile relationship between President Harry Truman (E. G. Marshall) and General MacArthur (Fonda), produced by ABC. After an appearance in the acclaimed Showtime broadcast of "Almos' a Man", based on a story by Richard Wright, he starred in the epic NBC miniseries "Captains and Kings", based on Taylor Caldwell's novel. Three years later, he appeared in ABC's "", but the miniseries was overshadowed by its predecessor, "Roots". Also in 1976, Fonda starred in the World War II blockbuster "Midway".

Fonda finished the 1970s in a number of disaster films. The first of these was the 1977 Italian killer octopus thriller "Tentacoli" ("Tentacles") and
"Rollercoaster", in which Fonda appeared with Richard Widmark and a young Helen Hunt. He performed again with Widmark, Olivia de Havilland, Fred MacMurray, and José Ferrer in the killer bee action film "The Swarm". He also acted in the global disaster film "Meteor" (his second role as a sitting President of the United States after "Fail-Safe"), with Sean Connery, Natalie Wood, and Karl Malden, and the Canadian production "City on Fire", which also featured Shelley Winters and Ava Gardner. Fonda had a small role with his son, Peter, in "Wanda Nevada" (1979), with Brooke Shields.

As Fonda's health declined and he took longer breaks between filming, critics began to take notice of his extensive body of work. In 1979, he was inducted into the American Theater Hall of Fame for his achievements on Broadway. Lifetime Achievement awards from the Golden Globes and Academy Awards followed in 1980 and 1981, respectively.

Fonda continued to act into the early 1980s, though all but one of the productions in which he was featured before his death were for television. The television works included the critically acclaimed live performance of Preston Jones' "The Oldest Living Graduate" and the Emmy-nominated "Gideon's Trumpet" (co-starring Fay Wray in her last performance) about Clarence Gideon's fight to have the right to publicly funded legal counsel for the indigent.
"On Golden Pond" in 1981, the film adaptation of Ernest Thompson's play, marked one final professional and personal triumph for Fonda. Directed by Mark Rydell, the project provided unprecedented collaborations between Fonda and Katharine Hepburn, along with Fonda and his daughter, Jane. The elder Fonda played an emotionally brittle and distant father who becomes more accessible at the end of his life. Jane Fonda has said that elements of the story mimicked their real-life relationship, and helped them resolve certain issues. She bought the film rights in the hope that her father would play the role, and later described it as "a gift to my father that was so unbelievably successful."

Premiered in December 1981, the film was well received by critics, and after a limited release on December 4, "On Golden Pond" developed enough of an audience to be widely released on January 22. With 10 Academy Award nominations, the film earned nearly $120 million at the box office, becoming an unexpected blockbuster. In addition to wins for Hepburn (Best Actress), and Thompson (Screenplay), "On Golden Pond" brought Fonda his only Oscar - for Best Actor (he was the oldest recipient of the award; it also earned him a Golden Globe Best Actor award). Fonda was by that point too ill to attend the ceremony, and his daughter Jane accepted on his behalf. She said when accepting the award that her dad would probably quip, "Well, ain't I lucky." After Fonda's death, some film critics called this performance "his last and greatest role".

Fonda's final performance was in the 1981 television drama "Summer Solstice" with Myrna Loy. It was filmed after "On Golden Pond" had wrapped and Fonda was in rapidly declining health.

Fonda was married five times and had three children, one of them adopted. His marriage to Margaret Sullavan in 1931 soon ended in separation, which was finalized in a 1933 divorce.

In 1936, he married Frances Ford Seymour Brokaw, widow of a wealthy industrialist, George Tuttle Brokaw. The Brokaws had a daughter, Frances de Villers, nicknamed "Pan", who had been born soon after the Brokaws marriage in 1931.

Fonda met his future wife Frances at Denham Studios in England on the set of "Wings of the Morning", the first British picture to be filmed in Technicolor. They had two children, Jane (born December 21, 1937) and Peter (born February 23, 1940), both of whom became successful actors. Jane has won two Best Actress Academy Awards, and Peter has been nominated for two Oscars, one for Best Actor.

In August 1949, Fonda announced to Frances that he wanted a divorce so he could remarry; their 13 years of marriage had not been happy ones for him. Devastated by Fonda's confession, and plagued by emotional problems for many years, Frances went into the Austen Riggs Psychiatric Hospital in January 1950 for treatment. She committed suicide there on April 14. Before her death, she had written six notes to various individuals, but left no final message for her husband. Fonda quickly arranged a private funeral with only himself and his mother-in-law, Sophie Seymour, in attendance. Years later, Dr. Margaret Gibson, the psychiatrist who had treated Frances at Austen Riggs, described Fonda as "a cold, self-absorbed person, a complete narcissist."

Later in 1950, Fonda married Susan Blanchard, with whom he had been having an affair since sometime in 1948. She was 21 years old, the daughter of Australian-born interior designer Dorothy Hammerstein, and the step-daughter of Oscar Hammerstein II. Together, they adopted a daughter, Amy Fishman (born 1953). They divorced three years later. Blanchard was in awe of Fonda, and she described her role in the marriage as "a geisha", doing everything she could to please him, dealing with and solving problems he would not acknowledge.

In 1957, Fonda married the Italian baroness Afdera Franchetti They divorced in 1961. Soon after, in 1965, Fonda married Shirlee Mae Adams, and remained with her until his death in 1982.

Fonda's relationship with his children has been described as "emotionally distant". Fonda loathed displays of feeling in himself or others, and this was a consistent part of his character. Whenever he felt that his emotional wall was being breached, he had outbursts of anger, exhibiting a furious temper that terrified his family. In Peter Fonda's 1998 autobiography "Don't Tell Dad" (1998), he described how he was never sure how his father felt about him. He never volunteered to his father that he loved him until he was elderly, and Peter finally heard, "I love you, son." His daughter Jane rejected her father's friendships with Republican actors such as John Wayne and James Stewart. Their relationship became extremely strained as Jane Fonda became a left-wing activist.

Jane Fonda reported feeling detached from her father, especially during her early acting days. In 1958, she met Lee Strasberg while visiting her father at Malibu. The Fonda and Strasberg families were neighbors, and she had developed a friendship with Strasberg's daughter, Susan. Jane Fonda began studying acting with Strasberg, learning the techniques of "The Method" of which Strasberg was a renowned proponent. This proved to be a pivotal point in her career. As Jane Fonda developed her skill as an actress, she became frustrated with her father's talent that, to her, appeared a demonstration of effortless ability.

Fonda was an ardent supporter of the Democratic Party and "an admirer" of U.S. President Franklin D. Roosevelt. In 1960, Fonda appeared in a campaign commercial for presidential candidate John F. Kennedy. The ad focused on Kennedy's naval service during World War II, specifically the famous PT-109 incident.

In the late 1950s, when Jane Fonda asked her father how he prepared before going on stage, she was baffled by his answer, "I don't know, I stand there, I think about my wife, Afdera, I don't know."

The writer Al Aronowitz, while working on a profile of Jane Fonda for "The Saturday Evening Post" in the 1960s, asked Henry Fonda about method acting: "I can't articulate about the Method", he told me, "because I never studied it. I don't mean to suggest that I have any feelings one way or the other about it...I don't know what the Method is and I don't care what the Method is. Everybody's got a method. Everybody can't articulate about their method, and I can't, if I have a method—and Jane sometimes says that I use the Method, that is, the capital letter Method, without being aware of it. Maybe I do; it doesn't matter."

Aronowitz reported Jane saying, "My father can't articulate the way he works. He just can't do it. He's not even conscious of what he does, and it made him nervous for me to try to articulate what I was trying to do. And I sensed that immediately, so we did very little talking about it...he said, 'Shut up, I don't want to hear about it.' He didn't want me to tell him about it, you know. He wanted to make fun of it."

Fonda died at his Los Angeles home on August 12, 1982, from heart disease. Fonda's wife, Shirlee, his daughter Jane, and his son Peter were at his side that day. He suffered from prostate cancer, but this did not directly cause his death and was noted only as a concurrent ailment on his death certificate.

Fonda requested that no funeral be held, and he was promptly cremated. President Ronald Reagan, a former actor himself, hailed Fonda as "a true professional dedicated to excellence in his craft. He graced the screen with a sincerity and accuracy which made him a legend."

Fonda is widely recognized as one of the Hollywood greats of the classic era. On the centenary of his birth, May 16, 2005, Turner Classic Movies (TCM) honored Fonda with a marathon of his films. Also in May 2005, the United States Post Office released a 37-cent postage stamp with an artist's drawing of Fonda as part of their "Hollywood legends" series. The Fonda Theatre in Hollywood, originally known as the Carter DeHaven Music Box, was named for the actor in 1985 by the Nederlander Organization.

From the beginning of his career in 1935 through his last projects in 1981, Fonda appeared in 106 films, television programs, and shorts. Through the course of his career, he appeared in many critically acclaimed films, including such classics as "12 Angry Men" and "The Ox-Bow Incident". He was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Actor for his role in 1940's "The Grapes of Wrath" and won for his part in 1981's "On Golden Pond". Fonda made his mark in Westerns (which included his most villainous role as Frank in "Once Upon a Time in the West") and war films, and made frequent appearances in both television and foreign productions late in his career.





</doc>
<doc id="78781" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=78781" title="Michael Douglas">
Michael Douglas

Michael Kirk Douglas (born September 25, 1944) is an American actor and producer. Douglas's career includes a diverse range of films in the independent and blockbuster genres, for which he has received a number of accolades, both competitive and honorary. These awards include the Golden Globe Cecil B. DeMille Award for "outstanding contributions to the world of entertainment" and the AFI Life Achievement Award, which "honor[s] an individual whose career in motion pictures or television has greatly contributed to the enrichment of American culture".

The elder son of Kirk Douglas and Diana Dill, Douglas received his Bachelor of Arts in Drama from the University of California, Santa Barbara. His early acting roles included film, stage, and television productions. Douglas first achieved prominence for his performance in the ABC police procedural television series "The Streets of San Francisco", for which he received three consecutive Emmy Award nominations. In 1975, Douglas produced "One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest", having acquired the rights to the Ken Kesey novel from his father. The film received critical and popular acclaim, and won the Academy Award for Best Picture, earning Douglas his first Oscar as one of the film's producers. After leaving "The Streets of San Francisco" in 1976, Douglas went on to produce films including "The China Syndrome" (1979) and "Romancing the Stone" (1984). He won the Golden Globe Award for Best Motion Picture - Musical or Comedy for "Romancing the Stone", in which he also starred, thus reintroducing himself to audiences as a capable leading man.

After reprising his "Romancing the Stone" role as Jack Colton in the 1985 sequel "The Jewel of the Nile", which he also produced, and along with appearing in the musical "A Chorus Line" (1985) and the psychological thriller "Fatal Attraction" (1987), Douglas received widespread acclaim for his portrayal of amoral corporate raider Gordon Gekko in the Oliver Stone-directed drama "Wall Street", for which he won the Academy Award for Best Actor. He reprised the role in the sequel "" (2010). Douglas's subsequent film roles included: "Black Rain" (1989); "The War of the Roses" (1989); "Basic Instinct" (1992); "The American President" (1995); "The Game" (1997); "Traffic" and "Wonder Boys" (both 2000); "Solitary Man" (2009); and "Ant-Man" (2015). In 2013, Douglas's performance as Liberace in the HBO biopic "Behind the Candelabra", received universal critical acclaim, and the actor won numerous accolades for his role, including Golden Globe, Emmy and Screen Actors Guild Awards. Apart from his career in the film industry, Douglas has received notice for his humanitarian and political activism, as well as media attention for his marriage to actress Catherine Zeta-Jones.

Douglas was born in New Brunswick, New Jersey, the first child of actors Kirk Douglas (1916–) and Diana Dill (1923–2015). His parents met at the American Academy of Dramatic Arts.

His paternal grandparents were Jewish emigrants from Chavusy (now in Belarus, then part of the Russian Empire), and his father was born Issur Danielovitch. His mother was from Devonshire Parish, Bermuda, and had English, Irish, Scottish, Welsh, French, Belgian, and Dutch ancestry. Douglas's uncle was politician Sir Nicholas Bayard Dill, and Douglas's maternal grandfather, Lieutenant Colonel Thomas Melville Dill, served as Attorney General of Bermuda, as a Member of the Parliament of Bermuda (MCP), and as commanding officer of the Bermuda Militia Artillery. His great-grandfather, Thomas Newbold Dill (1837-1910), was a merchant, an MCP for Devonshire Parish from 1868 to 1888, a Member of the Legislative Council and an Assistant Justice from 1888, Mayor of the City of Hamilton from 1891 to 1897, served on numerous committees and boards, and was a member of the Devonshire Church (Church of England) and Devonshire Parish vestries. Thomas Newbold Dill's father was a sea captain who took the Bermudian-built barque "Sir George F. Seymour" from Bermuda to Ireland in thirteen days in March 1858, but lost his master's certificate after the wreck of the Bermudian-built "Cedrine" on the Isle of Wight, while returning the last convict labourers from the Royal Naval Dockyard in Bermuda to Britain in 1863.

Douglas has a younger brother, Joel Douglas (born 1947), and two paternal half-brothers, Peter Douglas (born 1955) and Eric Douglas (1958–2004), from stepmother Anne Buydens.

Douglas attended The Allen-Stevenson School in New York City, Eaglebrook School in Deerfield, Massachusetts, and The Choate Preparatory School (now Choate Rosemary Hall) in Wallingford, Connecticut. He received his B.A. in drama from the University of California, Santa Barbara in 1968, where he was also the Honorary President of the UCSB Alumni Association. He studied acting with Wynn Handman at The American Place Theatre in New York City.

His first TV breakthrough role came with a 1969 CBS-TV "Playhouse" special, "The Experiment"—and it was the only time he was billed as "M.K. Douglas." Michael Douglas started his film career in the late 1960s and early 1970s, appearing in little known films such as "Hail, Hero!", "Adam at 6 A.M.", and "Summertree". His performance in "Hail, Hero!" earned him a nomination for the Golden Globe Award for Most Promising Male Newcomer. His first significant role came in the TV series "The Streets of San Francisco" from 1972 to 1976, in which he starred alongside Karl Malden. Douglas later said that Malden became a "mentor" and someone he "admired and loved deeply". After Douglas left the show, he had a long association with his mentor until Malden's death on July 1, 2009. In 2004, Douglas presented Malden with the Monte Cristo Award of the Eugene O'Neill Theater Center in Waterford, Connecticut for the Lifetime Achievement Award.

In 1975, Douglas received from his father, Kirk Douglas, the rights to the novel "One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest". Michael went on to produce the film of the same name with Saul Zaentz. Kirk Douglas hoped to portray McMurphy himself, having starred in an earlier stage version, but was deemed too old for the part by his son Michael. Kirk relented, and the lead role went instead to Jack Nicholson, who won the Academy Award for Best Actor. Douglas won the Award for Best Picture for producing the film.

After leaving "Streets of San Francisco" in 1976, Douglas played a hospital doctor in the medical thriller "Coma" (1978), and in 1979 he played the role of a troubled marathon runner in "Running". In 1979, he both produced and starred in "The China Syndrome", a dramatic film co-starring Jane Fonda and Jack Lemmon about a nuclear power plant accident (the Three Mile Island accident took place 12 days after the film's release). The film was considered "one of the most intelligent Hollywood films of the 1970s."

Douglas's acting career was propelled to fame when he produced and starred in the 1984 romantic adventure comedy "Romancing the Stone". It also reintroduced Douglas as a capable leading man and gave director Robert Zemeckis his first box-office success. The film also starred Danny DeVito, a friend of Douglas since they had shared an apartment in the 1960s. It was followed a year later by a sequel, "The Jewel of the Nile", which he also produced.
The year 1987 saw Douglas star in the thriller "Fatal Attraction" with Glenn Close. That same year he played tycoon Gordon Gekko in Oliver Stone's "Wall Street" for which he received an Academy Award as Best Actor. He reprised his role as Gekko in the sequel "" in 2010, also directed by Stone.

Douglas starred in the 1989 film "The War of the Roses", which also starred Kathleen Turner and Danny DeVito. In 1989 he starred in Ridley Scott's international police crime drama "Black Rain" opposite Andy García and Kate Capshaw; the film was shot in Osaka, Japan.

In 1992, Douglas had another successful starring role when he appeared alongside Sharon Stone in the film "Basic Instinct". The movie was a box office hit, and sparked controversy over its depictions of bisexuality and lesbianism. In 1994 Douglas and Demi Moore starred in the hit movie "Disclosure" focusing on the topic of sexual harassment with Douglas playing a man harassed by his new female boss. Other popular films he starred in during the decade were "Falling Down", "The American President", "The Ghost and the Darkness", "The Game" (directed by David Fincher), and a remake of Alfred Hitchcock's classic – "Dial M for Murder" – titled "A Perfect Murder". In 1998 Douglas received the Crystal Globe award for outstanding artistic contribution to world cinema at the Karlovy Vary International Film Festival. 

In 2000 Douglas starred in Steven Soderbergh's critically acclaimed film "Traffic", opposite Benicio del Toro and future wife, Catherine Zeta-Jones. That same year he also received critical acclaim for his role in "Wonder Boys", as a professor and novelist suffering from writer's block. He was nominated for a Golden Globe Award for Best Actor in a Drama as well as several other awards from critics.

Douglas starred in "Don't Say a Word" (2001), filmed shortly before his marriage to Zeta-Jones. In 2003, he starred in "It Runs in the Family", which featured three generations of his family (his parents, Kirk and Diana, as well as his own son, Cameron). The film, although a labor of love, was not successful, critically or at the box office. He then starred in and produced the action-thriller "The Sentinel" in 2006. During that time, he also guest-appeared on the episode, "Fatal Attraction", of the television sitcom "Will and Grace", as a gay cop attracted to Will Truman (Eric McCormack); the performance earned Douglas an Emmy Award nomination for Outstanding Guest Actor in a Comedy Show.

Douglas was approached for "Basic Instinct 2", but he declined to participate in the project.

In December 2007 Douglas began announcing the introduction to "NBC Nightly News". Howard Reig, the previous announcer, had retired two years earlier.

Douglas collaborated with Steven Soderbergh again on the 2013 film "Behind the Candelabra", playing Liberace, opposite Matt Damon, centered on the pianist's life. His portrayal of Liberace received critical acclaim, which resulted in him receiving the Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Miniseries or a Movie at the 65th Primetime Emmy Awards. He also won SAG and Golden Globe Awards for the performance. He played Hank Pym in the 2015 movie "Ant-Man", based on the Marvel Comics superhero of the same name. The film was directed by Peyton Reed and starred Paul Rudd.

Douglas is on the Board of Selectors of the Jefferson Awards for Public Service.

According to film historian and critic David Thomson, Douglas was capable of playing characters who were "weak, culpable, morally indolent, compromised, and greedy for illicit sensation without losing that basic probity or potential for ethical character that we require of a hero." Critic and author Rob Edelman points out similarities in many of Douglas's roles, writing that in some of his leading films, he personified the "contemporary, Caucasian middle-to-upper-class American male who finds himself the brunt of female anger because of real or imagined sexual slights."

These themes of male victimization are seen in films such as "Fatal Attraction" (1987), with Glenn Close, "War of the Roses" (1989), with Kathleen Turner, "Basic Instinct" (1992), with Sharon Stone, "Falling Down" (1993), and "Disclosure" (1994), with Demi Moore. For his characters in films such as these, "any kind of sexual contact with someone other than his mate and the mother of his children is destined to come at a costly price." Edelman describes his characters as the "Everyman who must contend with, and be victimized by, these women and their raging, psychotic sexuality."

Conversely, Douglas also played powerful characters with dominating personalities equally well: as Gordon Gekko, in the "Wall Street" franchise, he acted the role of a "greedy yuppie personification of the Me generation," convinced that "greed is good;" in "Romancing the Stone" and "The Jewel of the Nile," he played an idealistic soldier of fortune; in "The Star Chamber" (1983), he was a court judge fed up with an inadequate legal system, leading him to become involved with a vigilante group; and in "Black Rain" (1989), he proved he could also play a Stallone-like action hero as a New York City cop.

Having become recognized as both a successful producer and actor, he describes himself as "an actor first and a producer second." He has explained why he enjoys both functions:

After the filming of "Summertree" in 1971, Douglas began dating actress Brenda Vaccaro, a relationship that lasted nearly six years.

In March 1977, Douglas, who was 32 years old at the time, married 19-year-old Diandra Luker, the daughter of an Austrian diplomat. They had one son, Cameron, born in 1978. In 1995, Diandra filed for divorce and was awarded $45 million as part of the divorce settlement.

Dating since March 1999, Douglas married Welsh actress Catherine Zeta-Jones on November 18, 2000. They were both born on September 25, though 25 years apart. Zeta-Jones says that when they met in Deauville, France, Douglas said, "I want to father your children." They have two children, son Dylan Michael (born August 8, 2000) and daughter Carys Zeta (born April 20, 2003). In August 2013, "People" claimed that Douglas and Zeta-Jones began living separately in May 2013, but had not taken any legal action towards separation or divorce. A representative for Zeta-Jones subsequently confirmed that they "are taking some time apart to evaluate and work on their marriage." It was reported on November 1, 2013 that the couple had reconciled and Catherine moved back into their New York apartment.

Douglas was born to a Jewish father and an Anglican (Church of England) mother. His cousin, the Right Reverend Nicholas Dill, is the Bishop of the established Anglican Church of Bermuda. Douglas was not raised with a religious affiliation, but stated in January 2015 that he now identifies as a Reform Jew. His son, Dylan, had a Bar Mitzvah ceremony, and the Douglas family traveled to Jerusalem to mark the occasion.

Douglas was selected as the recipient of the 2015 Genesis Prize, a $1 million prize, awarded by the Genesis Prize Foundation. Douglas plans to donate the prize money to activities designed to raise awareness about inclusion and diversity in Jewish life, and to finding innovative solutions to pressing global and community problems. Douglas is a U.S. citizen by birth in the United States and has British Citizenship with Bermudian Status through his mother's birth in Bermuda.

In 2018, journalist and author Susan Braudy alleged on the U.S. TV program Today and in several interviews that, while in her 40s and working for Douglas in 1989, Douglas regularly made sexual and degrading comments around or toward her. She stated this prompted her to wear baggy clothing at work. She recounted an incident where Douglas unexpectedly unzipped his chinos during a script meeting, slid onto the floor, and put his hands in his pants. While still talking about the script, he allegedly masturbated and had an orgasm in front of her. Braudy then ran. Douglas asked her to sign a confidentiality agreement soon after, which she refused, but she lost her job 6 months later. She has shared corroborating evidence such as pay stubs supporting her timeline, a 1993 letter to a law center inquiring about sexual harassment, personal documentation, and three witnesses who went on record to say she told them about the incident at the time. Douglas admits to coarse language but categorically denied wrongdoing in a statement. His wife Catherine Zeta-Jones did not address the incidents, but said Douglas strongly supports the #MeToo movement, which encourages women to speak out about sexual harassment at work.

In 1980, Douglas was involved in a serious skiing accident which sidelined his acting career for three years. On September 17, 1992, the same year "Basic Instinct" came out, he began a 30-day treatment for alcoholism and drug addiction at Sierra Tucson Center.

In 1992, Douglas founded the short-lived Atlantic Records distributed label Third Stone Records. He founded the label with record producer Richard Rudolph, who became the company's President and CEO. Among the acts signed to Third Stone were Saigon Kick and Nona Gaye.

In 1997, New York caddie James Parker sued Douglas for $25 million. Parker accused Douglas of hitting him in the groin with an errant golf ball, causing Parker great distress. The case was later settled out of court.

In 2004, Douglas and Zeta-Jones took legal action against stalker Dawnette Knight, who was accused of sending violent letters to the couple that contained graphic threats on Zeta-Jones's life. Testifying, Zeta-Jones said the threats left her so shaken she feared a nervous breakdown. Knight claimed she had been in love with Douglas and admitted to the offenses, which took place between October 2003 and May 2004. She was sentenced to three years in prison.

It was announced on August 16, 2010 that Douglas was suffering from throat cancer (later revealed to have actually been tongue cancer), and would undergo chemotherapy and radiation treatment. Douglas subsequently confirmed that the cancer was at stage IV, the most advanced stage.

Douglas credits the discovery of his cancer to the public Canadian health system since a doctor in Montreal, Quebec diagnosed the actor's medical condition after numerous American specialists failed to do so. Douglas has since participated in fundraisers for Montreal's Jewish General Hospital, where he was diagnosed, and the McGill University Health Centre with which the hospital is affiliated.

Douglas attributed the cancer to stress, his previous alcohol abuse, and years of heavy smoking. In July 2011, "Star" magazine published photographs which appeared to show Douglas smoking a cigarette while on holiday that month. A representative declined to comment on the photographs.

In November 2010, Douglas's doctors put him on a weight-gain diet due to excessive weight loss that had left him weak. On January 11, 2011, he said that the tumor was gone, though the illness and aggressive treatment had caused him to lose 32 pounds (14.5kg). He said he would require monthly screenings because of a high chance of recurrence within three years. In June 2013, Douglas told "The Guardian" that his type of cancer is caused by HPV, transmitted by cunnilingus, leading some media to report this as well. His spokesman denied these reports and portrayed Douglas's conversation with "The Guardian" as general and not referring specifically to his own diagnosis. Although Douglas described the cancer as throat cancer, it was publicly speculated that he may actually have been diagnosed with oropharyngeal cancer. In October 2013, Douglas said he had suffered from tongue cancer, not throat cancer. He announced it as throat cancer upon the advice of his physician, who felt it would be unwise to reveal that he had tongue cancer given its negative prognosis and potential for disfigurement, particularly because the announcement came immediately before Douglas's promotional tour for "".

Douglas and Zeta-Jones hosted the annual Nobel Peace Prize concert in Oslo, Norway, on December 11, 2003. They acted as co-masters of ceremony in the concert celebrating the award given to Iranian human rights activist Shirin Ebadi. In 2006, Douglas was awarded an honorary Doctor of Letters (D.Litt.) from the University of St. Andrews in Scotland.

He is an advocate of nuclear disarmament, a supporter of the Nuclear Age Peace Foundation, sits on the board of the Nuclear Threat Initiative, and is an honorary Board Member of the anti-war grant-making foundation Ploughshares Fund. In 1998, he was appointed UN Messenger of Peace by Secretary-General Kofi Annan. He is a notable Democrat and has donated money to Barack Obama, Christopher Dodd, and Al Franken. He has been a major supporter of gun control since John Lennon was murdered in 1980.

In 2006, he was a featured speaker in a public service campaign sponsored by a UN conference to focus attention on trade of illicit arms, especially of small arms and light weapons. Douglas made several appearances and offered his opinions:
A few years earlier, in 2003, Douglas hosted a "powerful film" on child soldiers and the impact of combat on children in countries such as Sierra Leone. During the documentary film, Douglas interviewed children, and estimated that they were among 300,000 other children worldwide who have been conscripted or kidnapped and forced to fight. Of one such child he interviewed, Douglas stated, "After being kidnapped by a rebel group, he was tortured, drugged, and forced to commit atrocities."
Douglas discussed his role as a Messenger Peace for the UN:
In February 2012, following his return to the character of financial criminal Gordon Gekko, the Federal Bureau of Investigation released a public service announcement video of Michael Douglas calling on viewers to report financial crime. In August 2014, Douglas was one of 200 public figures who were signatories to a letter to "The Guardian" opposing Scottish independence in the run-up to September's referendum on that issue.

In June 2015, during a visit in Israel to receive the Genesis Prize, Douglas said the boycott movement against that country is an "ugly cancer."

In 2009, Douglas joined the project "Soldiers of Peace", a movie against all wars and for global peace.

Douglas lent his support for the campaign to release Sakineh Mohammadi Ashtiani, the Iranian woman, who after having been convicted of committing adultery, was given a sentence of death by stoning.




</doc>
<doc id="44359" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44359" title="Gary Cooper">
Gary Cooper

Gary Cooper (born Frank James Cooper; May 7, 1901 – May 13, 1961) was an American film actor known for his natural, authentic, and understated acting style and screen performances. His career spanned thirty-five years, from 1925 to 1960, and included leading roles in eighty-four feature films. He was a major movie star from the end of the silent film era through to the end of the golden age of Classical Hollywood. His screen persona appealed strongly to both men and women, and his range of performances included roles in most major movie genres. Cooper's ability to project his own personality onto the characters he played contributed to his appearing natural and authentic on screen. The screen persona he sustained throughout his career represented the ideal American hero.

Cooper began his career as a film extra and stunt rider, but soon landed acting roles. After establishing himself as a Western hero in his early silent films, Cooper became a movie star in 1929 with his first sound picture, "The Virginian". In the early 1930s, he expanded his heroic image to include more cautious characters in adventure films and dramas such as "A Farewell to Arms" (1932) and "The Lives of a Bengal Lancer" (1935). During the height of his career, Cooper portrayed a new type of hero—a champion of the common man—in films such as "Mr. Deeds Goes to Town" (1936), "Meet John Doe" (1941), "Sergeant York" (1941), "The Pride of the Yankees" (1942), and "For Whom the Bell Tolls" (1943).

In the postwar years, he portrayed more mature characters at odds with the world in films such as "The Fountainhead" (1949) and "High Noon" (1952). In his final films, Cooper played non-violent characters searching for redemption in films such as "Friendly Persuasion" (1956) and "Man of the West" (1958).

He married New York debutante Veronica Balfe in 1933, and the couple had one daughter. Their marriage was interrupted by a three-year separation precipitated by Cooper's love affair with Patricia Neal. Cooper received the Academy Award for Best Actor for his roles in "Sergeant York" and "High Noon". He also received an Academy Honorary Award for his career achievements in 1961. He was one of the top ten film personalities for twenty-three consecutive years, and was one of the top money-making stars for eighteen years. The American Film Institute (AFI) ranked Cooper eleventh on its list of the twenty five greatest male stars of classic Hollywood cinema.

Frank James Cooper was born on May 7, 1901, at 730 Eleventh Avenue in Helena, Montana to English immigrants Alice (née Brazier, 1873–1967) and Charles Henry Cooper (1865–1946). His father emigrated from Houghton Regis, Bedfordshire and became a prominent lawyer, rancher, and eventually a Montana Supreme Court justice. His mother emigrated from Gillingham, Kent and married Charles in Montana. In 1906, Charles purchased the Seven-Bar-Nine cattle ranch about north of Helena near the town of Craig on the Missouri River. Frank and his older brother Arthur spent their summers there and learned to ride horses, hunt, and fish. In April 1908, the Hauser Dam failed and flooded the Missouri River valley along portions of the Cooper property, but Cooper and his family were able to evacuate in time. Cooper attended Central Grade School in Helena.

In the summer of 1909, Alice, wanting her sons to have an English education, accompanied them to England and enrolled them in Dunstable Grammar School in Bedfordshire, where Cooper was educated from 1910 to 1912. At Dunstable, Cooper studied Latin and French, and took several courses in English history. While he managed to adapt to the discipline of an English school and learned the requisite social graces, he never adjusted to the rigid class structure and formal Eton collars he was forced to wear. After completing confirmation classes, Cooper was baptized into the Anglican Church on December 3, 1911, at the Church of All Saints in Houghton Regis. Cooper's mother accompanied her sons back to the United States in August 1912, and Cooper resumed his education at Johnson Grammar School in Helena.

At the age of fifteen, Cooper injured his hip in a car accident and returned to the Seven-Bar-Nine ranch to recuperate by horseback riding at the recommendation of his doctor. The misguided therapy left him with his characteristic stiff, off-balanced walk and slightly angled riding style. After attending Helena High School for two years, he left school in 1918 and returned to the family ranch to help raise their five hundred head of cattle and work full-time as a cowboy. In 1919, his father arranged for his son to complete his high school education at Gallatin County High School in Bozeman, Montana. His English teacher, Ida Davis, encouraged him to focus on academics, join the school's debating team, and get involved in dramatics. His parents would later credit her for helping their son complete high school, and Cooper confirmed, "She was the woman partly responsible for me giving up cowboy-ing and going to college."

In 1920, while still attending high school, Cooper took three art courses at Montana Agricultural College in Bozeman. His interest in art was inspired years earlier by the Western paintings of Charles Marion Russell and Frederic Remington. Cooper especially admired and studied Russell's "Lewis and Clark Meeting Indians at Ross' Hole" (1910), which still hangs in the state capitol building in Helena. In 1922, Cooper enrolled in Grinnell College in Iowa to continue his art education. Cooper did well academically in most of his courses, but was not accepted into the school's drama club. His drawings and watercolors were exhibited throughout the dormitory, and he was named art editor for the college yearbook. During the summers of 1922 and 1923, Cooper worked at Yellowstone National Park as a tour guide driving the yellow open-top buses. Despite a promising first eighteen months at Grinnell, he left college suddenly in February 1924, spent a month in Chicago looking for work as an artist, and then returned to Helena, where he sold editorial cartoons to the "Independent", a local newspaper.

In the autumn of 1924, Cooper's father left the Montana Supreme Court bench and moved with his wife to Los Angeles to administer the estates of two relatives. At his father's request, Cooper joined his parents in California on Thanksgiving Day, November 27, 1924. In the coming weeks, after working a series of unpromising jobs, Cooper met two friends from Montana, Jim Galeen and Jim Calloway, who were working as film extras and stunt riders in low-budget Western films for the small movie studios on Poverty Row on Gower Street. They introduced him to another Montana cowboy, rodeo champion Jay "Slim" Talbot, who took him to see a casting director who offered him work. With the goal of saving enough money to pay for a professional art course, Cooper decided to try his hand at working as a film extra for five dollars a day, and as a stunt rider for twice that amount.

In early 1925, Cooper began his film career working in silent pictures such as "The Thundering Herd" and "Wild Horse Mesa" with Jack Holt, "Riders of the Purple Sage" and "The Lucky Horseshoe" with Tom Mix, and "The Trail Rider" with Buck Jones. He worked for several Poverty Row studios, including Famous Players-Lasky and Fox Film Corporation. While his skills as a horseman led to steady work in Westerns, Cooper found the stunt work "tough and cruel", sometimes resulting in injury to the horses and riders. Hoping to move beyond the risky stunt work and obtain acting roles, Cooper paid for a screen test and hired casting director Nan Collins to work as his agent. Knowing that other actors were using the name "Frank Cooper", Collins suggested he change his first name to "Gary" after her hometown of Gary, Indiana. Cooper liked the name immediately.

Cooper also found work in a variety of non-Western films, appearing, for example, as a masked Cossack in "The Eagle" (1925), as a Roman guard in "Ben-Hur" (1925), and as a flood survivor in "The Johnstown Flood" (1926). Gradually, he began to land credited roles that offered him more screen time, in films such as "Tricks" (1925), in which he played the film's antagonist, and the short film "Lightnin' Wins" (1926). As a featured player, he began to attract the attention of major film studios. On June 1, 1926, Cooper signed a contract with Samuel Goldwyn Productions for fifty dollars a week.

Cooper's first important film role was in "The Winning of Barbara Worth" (1926) with Ronald Colman and Vilma Bánky. In the film, Cooper plays a young engineer, Abe Lee, who helps a rival suitor save the woman he loves and her town from an impending dam disaster. Cooper's experience living among the Montana cowboys gave his performance an "instinctive authenticity", according to biographer Jeffrey Meyers. The film premiered on October 14 and was a major success. Critics singled out Cooper as a "dynamic new personality" and future star. Goldwyn rushed to offer the actor a long-term contract, but Cooper held out for a better deal—finally signing a five-year contract with Jesse L. Lasky at Paramount Pictures for $175 a week. In 1927, with help from established movie star Clara Bow, Cooper landed high-profile roles in "Children of Divorce" and "Wings", the latter being the first film to win an Academy Award for Best Picture. That year, Cooper also appeared in his first starring roles in "Arizona Bound" and "Nevada"—both films directed by John Waters.

In 1928, Paramount paired Cooper with a youthful Fay Wray in "The Legion of the Condemned" and "The First Kiss"—advertising them as the studio's "glorious young lovers". Their on-screen chemistry failed to generate much excitement with audiences. With each new film, Cooper's acting skills improved and his popularity continued to grow, especially among female movie-goers. During this time, he was earning as much as $2,750 per film and receiving a thousand fan letters a week. Looking to exploit Cooper's growing audience appeal, the studio placed him opposite popular leading ladies such as Evelyn Brent in "Beau Sabreur", Florence Vidor in "Doomsday", and Esther Ralston in "Half a Bride". That year, Cooper also made "Lilac Time" with Colleen Moore for First National Pictures, his first movie with synchronized music and sound effects. It became one of the most commercially successful films of 1928.

Cooper became a major movie star in 1929 with the release of his first sound picture, "The Virginian", which was directed by Victor Fleming and co-starred Mary Brian and Walter Huston. Based on the popular novel by Owen Wister, "The Virginian" was one of the first sound films to define the Western code of honor and helped establish many of the conventions of the Western movie genre that have lasted to the present day. According to biographer Jeffrey Meyers, the romantic image of the tall, handsome, and shy cowboy hero who embodied male freedom, courage, and honor was created in large part by Cooper in the film. Unlike some silent film actors who had trouble adapting to the new sound medium, Cooper transitioned naturally, with his "deep and clear" and "pleasantly drawling" voice, which was perfectly suited for the characters he portrayed on screen, also according to Meyers. Looking to capitalize on Cooper's growing popularity, Paramount cast him in several Westerns and wartime dramas in 1930, including "Only the Brave", "The Texan", "Seven Days' Leave", "A Man from Wyoming", and "The Spoilers".

One of the more important performances in Cooper's early career was his portrayal of a sullen legionnaire in Josef von Sternberg's 1930 film "Morocco" with Marlene Dietrich in her introduction to American audiences. During production, von Sternberg focused his energies on Dietrich and treated Cooper dismissively. Tensions came to a head after von Sternberg yelled directions at Cooper in German. The actor approached the director, physically picked him up by the collar and said, "If you expect to work in this country you'd better get on to the language we use here." Despite the tensions on the set, Cooper produced "one of his best performances", according to Thornton Delehanty of the "New York Evening Post". In 1931, after returning to the Western genre in Zane Grey's "Fighting Caravans" with French actress Lili Damita, Cooper appeared in the Dashiell Hammett crime film "City Streets" playing a westerner who gets involved with big-city gangsters in order to save the woman he loves. Cooper concluded the year with appearances in two unsuccessful films: "I Take This Woman" with Carole Lombard, and "His Woman" with Claudette Colbert. The demands and pressures of making ten films in two years left Cooper exhausted and in poor health, suffering from anemia and jaundice. He had lost during that period, and felt lonely, isolated, and depressed by his sudden fame and wealth. In May 1931, Cooper left Hollywood and sailed to Algiers and then Italy, where he lived for the next year.

During his time abroad, Cooper stayed with the Countess Dorothy di Frasso at the Villa Madama in Rome, where she taught him about good food and vintage wines, how to read Italian and French menus, and how to socialize among Europe's nobility and upper classes. After guiding him through the great art museums and galleries of Italy, she accompanied him on a ten-week big-game hunting safari on the slopes of Mount Kenya in East Africa, where he was credited with over sixty kills, including two lions, a rhinoceros, and various antelopes. His safari experience in Africa had a profound influence on Cooper and intensified his love of the wilderness. After returning to Europe, he and the countess set off on a Mediterranean cruise of the Italian and French Rivieras. Rested and rejuvenated by his year-long exile, a healthy Cooper returned to Hollywood in April 1932 and negotiated a new contract with Paramount for two films per year, a salary of $4,000 a week, and director and script approval.

In 1932, after completing "Devil and the Deep" with Tallulah Bankhead to fulfill his old contract, Cooper appeared in "A Farewell to Arms", the first film adaptation of an Ernest Hemingway novel. Co-starring Helen Hayes, a leading New York theatre star and Academy Award winner, and Adolphe Menjou, the film presented Cooper with one of his most ambitious and challenging dramatic roles, playing an American ambulance driver wounded in Italy who falls in love with an English nurse during World War I. Critics praised his highly intense and emotional performance, and the film became one of the year's most commercially successful pictures. In 1933, after making "Today We Live" with Joan Crawford and "One Sunday Afternoon" with Fay Wray, Cooper appeared in the Ernst Lubitsch comedy film "Design for Living", based on the successful Noël Coward play. Co-starring Miriam Hopkins and Fredric March, the film received mixed reviews and did not do well at the box office. Cooper's performance—playing an American artist in Europe competing with his playwright friend for the affections of a beautiful woman—was singled out for its versatility and revealed his genuine ability to do light comedy. Cooper changed his name legally to "Gary Cooper" in August 1933.

In 1934, Cooper was loaned out to MGM for the Civil War drama film "Operator 13" with Marion Davies, about a beautiful Union spy who falls in love with a Confederate soldier. Despite Richard Boleslawski's imaginative direction and George J. Folsey's lavish cinematography, the film did poorly at the box office. Back at Paramount, Cooper appeared in his first of seven films by director Henry Hathaway, "Now and Forever", with Carole Lombard and Shirley Temple. In the film, he plays a confidence man who tries to sell his daughter to the relatives who raised her, but is eventually won over by the adorable girl. Impressed by Temple's intelligence and charm, Cooper developed a close rapport with her, both on and off screen. The film was a box-office success.

The following year, Cooper was loaned out to Samuel Goldwyn Productions to appear in King Vidor's romance film "The Wedding Night" with Anna Sten, who was being groomed as "another Garbo". In the film, Cooper plays an alcoholic novelist who retreats to his family's New England farm where he meets and falls in love with a beautiful Polish neighbor. Cooper delivered a performance of surprising range and depth, according to biographer Larry Swindell. Despite receiving generally favorable reviews, the film was not popular with American audiences, who may have been offended by the film's depiction of an extramarital affair and its tragic ending. That same year, Cooper appeared in two Henry Hathaway films: the melodrama "Peter Ibbetson" with Ann Harding, about a man caught up in a dream world created by his love for a childhood sweetheart, and the adventure film "The Lives of a Bengal Lancer", about a daring British officer and his men who defend their stronghold at Bengal against rebellious local tribes. While the former was more successful in Europe than in the United States, the latter was nominated for six Academy Awards and became one of Cooper's most popular and successful adventure films. Hathaway had the highest respect for Cooper's acting ability, calling him "the best actor of all of them".

The year 1936 marked an important turning point in Cooper's career. After making Frank Borzage's romantic comedy film "Desire" with Marlene Dietrich at Paramount—delivering a performance considered by some contemporary critics as one of his finest—Cooper returned to Poverty Row for the first time since his early silent film days to make Frank Capra's screwball comedy "Mr. Deeds Goes to Town" with Jean Arthur for Columbia Pictures. In the film, Cooper plays the character of Longfellow Deeds, a quiet, innocent writer of greeting cards who inherits a fortune, leaves behind his idyllic life in Vermont, and travels to New York where he faces a world of corruption and deceit. Capra and screenwriter Robert Riskin were able to use Cooper's well-established screen persona as the "quintessential American hero"—a symbol of honesty, courage, and goodness—to create a new type of "folk hero" for the common man. Commenting on Cooper's impact on the character and the film, Capra observed:

Both "Desire" and "Mr. Deeds" opened in April 1936 to critical praise and were major box-office successes. In his review in "The New York Times", Frank Nugent wrote that Cooper was "proving himself one of the best light comedians in Hollywood". For his performance in "Mr. Deeds", Cooper received his first Academy Award nomination for Best Actor.

Cooper appeared in two other Paramount films in 1936. In Lewis Milestone's adventure film "The General Died at Dawn" with Madeleine Carroll, he plays an American soldier of fortune in China who helps the peasants defend themselves against the oppression of a cruel warlord. Written by playwright Clifford Odets, the film was a critical and commercial success. In Cecil B. DeMille's sprawling frontier epic "The Plainsman"—his first of four films with the director—Cooper portrays Wild Bill Hickok in a highly fictionalized version of the opening of the American western frontier. The film was an even greater box-office hit than its predecessor, due in large part to Jean Arthur's definitive depiction of Calamity Jane and Cooper's inspired portrayal of Hickock as an enigmatic figure of "deepening mythic substance". That year, Cooper appeared for the first time on the "Motion Picture Herald" exhibitor's poll of top ten film personalities, where he would remain for the next twenty-three years.

In late 1936, while Paramount was preparing a new contract for Cooper that would raise his salary to $8,000 a week, Cooper signed a contract with Samuel Goldwyn for six films over six years with a minimum guarantee of $150,000 per picture. Paramount brought suit against Goldwyn and Cooper, and the court ruled that Cooper's new Goldwyn contract afforded the actor sufficient time to also honor his Paramount agreement. Cooper continued to make films with both studios, and by 1939 the United States Treasury reported that Cooper was the country's highest wage earner, at $482,819 (equivalent to $ million in ).

In contrast to his output the previous year, Cooper appeared in only one picture in 1937, Henry Hathaway's adventure film "Souls at Sea". A critical and box-office failure, Cooper referred to it as his "almost picture", saying, "It was almost exciting, and almost interesting. And I was almost good." In 1938, he appeared in Archie Mayo's biographical film "The Adventures of Marco Polo". Plagued by production problems and a weak screenplay, the film became Goldwyn's biggest failure to that date, losing $700,000. During this period, Cooper turned down several important roles, including the role of Rhett Butler in "Gone with the Wind". Cooper was producer David O. Selznick's first choice for the part. He made several overtures to the actor, but Cooper had doubts about the project, and did not feel suited to the role. Cooper later admitted, "It was one of the best roles ever offered in Hollywood ... But I said no. I didn't see myself as quite that dashing, and later, when I saw Clark Gable play the role to perfection, I knew I was right."

Back at Paramount, Cooper returned to a more comfortable genre in Ernst Lubitsch's romantic comedy "Bluebeard's Eighth Wife" (1938) with Claudette Colbert. In the film, Cooper plays a wealthy American businessman in France who falls in love with an impoverished aristocrat's daughter and persuades her to become his eighth wife. Despite the clever screenplay by Charles Brackett and Billy Wilder, and solid performances by Cooper and Colbert, American audiences had trouble accepting Cooper in the role of a shallow philanderer. After all, it succeeded only in the European market. In the fall of 1938, Cooper appeared in H. C. Potter's romantic comedy "The Cowboy and the Lady" with Merle Oberon, about a sweet-natured rodeo cowboy who falls in love with the wealthy daughter of a presidential hopeful, believing her to be a poor, hard-working lady's maid. The efforts of three directors and several eminent screenwriters could not salvage what could have been a fine vehicle for Cooper. While more successful than its predecessor, the film was Cooper's fourth consecutive box-office failure in the American market.

In the next two years, Cooper was more discerning about the roles he accepted and made four successful large-scale adventure and cowboy films. In William A. Wellman's adventure film "Beau Geste" (1939), he plays one of three daring English brothers who join the French Foreign Legion in the Sahara to fight local tribes. Filmed in the same Mojave Desert locations as the original 1926 version with Ronald Colman, "Beau Geste" provided Cooper with magnificent sets, exotic settings, high-spirited action, and a role tailored to his personality and screen persona. This was the last film in Cooper's contract with Paramount. In Henry Hathaway's "The Real Glory" (1939), he plays a military doctor who accompanies a small group of American Army officers to the Philippines to help the Christian Filipinos defend themselves against Muslim radicals. Many film critics praised Cooper's performance, including author and film critic Graham Greene who recognized that he "never acted better".

Cooper returned to the Western genre in William Wyler's "The Westerner" (1940) with Walter Brennan and Doris Davenport, about a drifting cowboy who defends homesteaders against Roy Bean, a corrupt judge known as the "law west of the Pecos". Screenwriter Niven Busch relied on Cooper's extensive knowledge of Western history while working on the script. The film received positive reviews and did well at the box-office, with reviewers praising the performances of the two lead actors. That same year, Cooper appeared in his first all-Technicolor feature, Cecil B. DeMille's adventure film "North West Mounted Police" (1940). In the film, Cooper plays a Texas Ranger who pursues an outlaw into western Canada where he joins forces with the Royal Canadian Mounted Police who are after the same man, a leader of the North-West Rebellion. While not as popular with critics as its predecessor, the film was another box-office success—the sixth-highest-grossing film of 1940.

The early 1940s were Cooper's prime years as an actor. In a relatively short period, he appeared in five critically successful and popular films that produced some of his finest performances. When Frank Capra offered him the lead role in "Meet John Doe" before Robert Riskin even developed the script, Cooper accepted his friend's offer, saying, "It's okay, Frank, I don't need a script." In the film, Cooper plays Long John Willoughby, a down-and-out bush-league pitcher hired by a newspaper to pretend to be a man who promises to commit suicide on Christmas Eve to protest all the hypocrisy and corruption in the country. Considered by some critics to be Capra's best film at the time, "Meet John Doe" was received as a "national event" with Cooper appearing on the front cover of "Time" magazine on March 3, 1941. In his review in the "New York Herald Tribune", Howard Barnes called Cooper's performance a "splendid and utterly persuasive portrayal" and praised his "utterly realistic acting which comes through with such authority". Bosley Crowther, in "The New York Times", wrote, "Gary Cooper, of course, is 'John Doe' to the life and in the whole—shy, bewildered, non-aggressive, but a veritable tiger when aroused."

That same year, Cooper made two films with director and good friend Howard Hawks. In the biographical film "Sergeant York", Cooper portrays war hero Alvin C. York, one of the most decorated American soldiers in World War I. The film chronicles York's early backwoods days in Tennessee, his religious conversion and subsequent piety, his stand as a conscientious objector, and finally his heroic actions at the Battle of the Argonne Forest, which earned him the Medal of Honor. Initially, Cooper was nervous and uncertain about playing a living hero, so he traveled to Tennessee to visit York at his home, and the two quiet men established an immediate rapport and discovered they had much in common. Inspired by York's encouragement, Cooper delivered a performance that Howard Barnes of the "New York Herald Tribune" called "one of extraordinary conviction and versatility", and that Archer Winston of the "New York Post" called "one of his best". After the film's release, Cooper was awarded the Distinguished Citizenship Medal by the Veterans of Foreign Wars for his "powerful contribution to the promotion of patriotism and loyalty". York admired Cooper's performance and helped promote the film for Warner Bros. "Sergeant York" became the top-grossing film of the year and was nominated for eleven Academy Awards. Accepting his first Academy Award for Best Actor from his friend James Stewart, Cooper said, "It was Sergeant Alvin York who won this award. Shucks, I've been in the business sixteen years and sometimes dreamed I might get one of these. That's all I can say ... Funny when I was dreaming I always made a better speech."

Cooper concluded the year back at Goldwyn with Howard Hawks to make the romantic comedy "Ball of Fire" with Barbara Stanwyck. In the film, Cooper plays a shy linguistics professor who leads a team of seven scholars who are writing an encyclopedia. While researching slang, he meets Stanwyck's flirtatious burlesque stripper Sugarpuss O'Shea who blows the dust off their staid life of books. The screenplay by Charles Brackett and Billy Wilder provided Cooper the opportunity to exercise the full range of his light comedy skills. In his review for the "New York Herald Tribune", Howard Barnes wrote that Cooper handled the role with "great skill and comic emphasis" and that his performance was "utterly delightful". Though small in scale, "Ball of Fire" was one of the top-grossing films of the year—Cooper's fourth consecutive picture to make the top twenty.

Cooper's only film appearance in 1942 was also his last under his Goldwyn contract. In Sam Wood's biographical film "The Pride of the Yankees", Cooper portrays baseball star Lou Gehrig who established a record with the New York Yankees for playing in 2,130 consecutive games. Cooper was reluctant to play the seven-time All-Star, who only died the previous year from amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) —now commonly called "Lou Gehrig's disease". Beyond the challenges of effectively portraying such a popular and nationally recognized figure, Cooper knew very little about baseball and was not left-handed like Gehrig. After Gehrig's widow visited the actor and expressed her desire that he portray her husband, Cooper accepted the role that covered a twenty-year span of Gehrig's life—his early love of baseball, his rise to greatness, his loving marriage, and his struggle with illness, culminating in his farewell speech at Yankee Stadium on July 4, 1939 before 62,000 fans. Cooper quickly learned the physical movements of a baseball player and developed a fluid, believable swing. The handedness issue was solved by reversing the print for certain batting scenes. The film was one of the year's top ten pictures and received eleven Academy Award nominations, including Best Picture and Best Actor (Cooper's third).

Soon after the publication of Ernest Hemingway's novel "For Whom the Bell Tolls", Paramount paid $150,000 for the film rights with the express intent of casting Cooper in the lead role of Robert Jordan, an American explosives expert who fights alongside the Republican loyalists during the Spanish Civil War. The original director, Cecil B. DeMille, was replaced by Sam Wood who brought in Dudley Nichols for the screenplay. After the start of principal photography in the Sierra Nevada in late 1942, Ingrid Bergman was brought in to replace ballerina Vera Zorina as the female lead—a change supported by Cooper and Hemingway. The love scenes between Bergman and Cooper were "rapturous" and passionate. Howard Barnes in the "New York Herald Tribune" wrote that both actors performed with "the true stature and authority of stars". While the film distorted the novel's original political themes and meaning, "For Whom the Bell Tolls" was a critical and commercial success and received ten Academy Award nominations, including Best Picture and Best Actor (Cooper's fourth).

Cooper did not serve in the military during World War II due to his age and health, but like many of his colleagues, he got involved in the war effort by entertaining the troops. In June 1943, he visited military hospitals in San Diego, and often appeared at the Hollywood Canteen serving food to the servicemen. In late 1943, Cooper undertook a tour of the South West Pacific with actresses Una Merkel and Phyllis Brooks, and accordionist Andy Arcari. Traveling on a B-24A Liberator bomber, the group toured the Cook Islands, Fiji, New Caledonia, Queensland, Brisbane—where General Douglas MacArthur told Cooper he was watching "Sergeant York" in a Manila theater when Japanese bombs began falling—New Guinea, Jayapura, and throughout the Solomon Islands. The group often shared the same sparse living conditions and K-rations as the troops. Cooper met with the servicemen and women, visited military hospitals, introduced his attractive colleagues, and participated in occasional skits. The shows concluded with Cooper's moving recitation of Lou Gehrig's farewell speech. When he returned to the United States, he visited military hospitals throughout the country. Cooper later called his time with the troops the "greatest emotional experience" of his life.

In 1944, Cooper appeared in Cecil B. DeMille's wartime adventure film "The Story of Dr. Wassell" with Laraine Day—his third movie with the director. In the film, Cooper plays American doctor and missionary Corydon M. Wassell, who leads a group of wounded sailors through the jungles of Java to safety. Despite receiving poor reviews, "Dr. Wassell" was one of the top-grossing films of the year. With his Goldwyn and Paramount contracts now concluded, Cooper decided to remain independent and formed his own production company, International Pictures, with Leo Spitz, William Goetz, and Nunnally Johnson. The fledgling studio's first offering was Sam Wood's romantic comedy "Casanova Brown" with Teresa Wright, about a man who learns his soon-to-be ex-wife is pregnant with his child, just as he is about to marry another woman. The film received poor reviews, with the "New York Daily News" calling it "delightful nonsense", and Bosley Crowther, in "The New York Times", criticizing Cooper's "somewhat obvious and ridiculous clowning". The film was barely profitable. In 1945, Cooper starred in and produced Stuart Heisler's Western comedy "Along Came Jones" with Loretta Young for International. In this lighthearted parody of his past heroic image, Cooper plays comically inept cowboy Melody Jones who is mistaken for a ruthless killer. Audiences embraced Cooper's character, and the film was one of the top box-office pictures of the year—a testament to Cooper's still vital audience appeal. It was also International's biggest financial success during its brief history before being sold off to Universal Studios in 1946.

Cooper's career during the post-war years drifted in new directions as American society was changing. While he still played conventional heroic roles, his films now relied less on his heroic screen persona and more on novel stories and exotic settings. In November 1945, Cooper appeared in Sam Wood's nineteenth century period drama "Saratoga Trunk" with Ingrid Bergman, about a Texas cowboy and his relationship with a beautiful fortune-hunter. Filmed in early 1943, the movie's release was delayed for two years due to the increased demand for war movies. Despite poor reviews, "Saratoga Trunk" did well at the box office and became one of the top money-makers of the year for Warner Bros. Cooper's only film in 1946 was Fritz Lang's romantic thriller "Cloak and Dagger", about a mild-mannered physics professor recruited by the OSS during the last years of World War II to investigate the German atomic bomb program. Playing a part loosely based on physicist J. Robert Oppenheimer, Cooper was uneasy with the role and was unable to convey the "inner sense" of the character. The film received poor reviews and was a box-office failure. In 1947, Cooper appeared in Cecil B. DeMille's epic adventure film "Unconquered" with Paulette Goddard, about a Virginia militiaman who defends settlers against an unscrupulous gun trader and hostile Indians on the Western frontier during the eighteenth century. The film received mixed reviews, but even long-time DeMille critic James Agee acknowledged the picture had "some authentic flavor of the period". This last of four films made with DeMille was Cooper's most lucrative, earning the actor over $300,000 in salary and percentage of profits. "Unconquered" would be his last unqualified box-office success for the next five years.

In 1948, after making Leo McCarey's romantic comedy "Good Sam", Cooper sold his company to Universal Studios and signed a long-term contract with Warner Bros. that gave him script and director approval and a guaranteed $295,000 per picture. His first film under the new contract was King Vidor's drama "The Fountainhead" (1949) with Patricia Neal and Raymond Massey. In the film, Cooper plays an idealistic and uncompromising architect who struggles to maintain his integrity and individualism in the face of societal pressures to conform to popular standards. Based on the novel by Ayn Rand who also wrote the screenplay, the film reflects her Objectivist philosophy and attacks the concepts of altruism and collectivism while promoting the virtues of selfishness and individualism. For most critics, Cooper was hopelessly miscast in the role of Howard Roark. In his review for "The New York Times", Bosley Crowther concluded he was "Mr. Deeds out of his element". Cooper returned to his element in Delmer Daves' war drama "Task Force" (1949), about a retiring rear admiral who reminisces about his long career as a naval aviator and his role in the development of aircraft carriers. Cooper's performance and the Technicolor newsreel footage supplied by the United States Navy made the film one of Cooper's most popular during this period. In the next two years, Cooper made four poorly received films: Michael Curtiz' period drama "Bright Leaf" (1950), Stuart Heisler's Western melodrama "Dallas" (1950), Henry Hathaway's wartime comedy "You're in the Navy Now" (1951), and Raoul Walsh's Western action film "Distant Drums" (1951).

Cooper's most important film during the post-war years was Fred Zinnemann's Western drama "High Noon" (1952) with Grace Kelly for United Artists. In the film, Cooper plays retiring sheriff Will Kane who is preparing to leave town on his honeymoon when he learns that an outlaw he helped put away and his three henchmen are returning to seek their revenge. Unable to gain the support of the frightened townspeople, and abandoned by his young bride, Kane nevertheless stays to face the outlaws alone. During the filming, Cooper was in poor health and in considerable pain from stomach ulcers. His ravaged face and discomfort in some scenes "photographed as self-doubt", according to biographer Hector Arce, and contributed to the effectiveness of his performance. Considered one of the first "adult" Westerns for its theme of moral courage, "High Noon" received enthusiastic reviews for its artistry, with "Time" magazine placing it in the ranks of "Stagecoach" and "The Gunfighter". Bosley Crowther, in "The New York Times", wrote that Cooper was "at the top of his form", and John McCarten, in "The New Yorker", wrote that Cooper was never more effective. The film earned $3.75 million in the United States and $18 million worldwide. Following the example of his friend James Stewart, Cooper accepted a lower salary in exchange for a percent of the profits, and ended up making $600,000. Cooper's understated performance was widely praised, and earned him his second Academy Award for Best Actor.

After appearing in André de Toth's Civil War drama "Springfield Rifle" (1952)—a standard Warner Bros. film that was overshadowed by the success of its predecessor—Cooper made four films outside the United States. In Mark Robson's drama "Return to Paradise" (1953), Cooper plays an American wanderer who liberates the inhabitants of a Polynesian island from the puritanical rule of a misguided pastor. Cooper endured spartan living conditions, long hours, and ill health during the three-month location shoot on the island of Upolu in Western Samoa. Despite its beautiful cinematography, the film received poor reviews. Cooper's next three films were shot in Mexico. In Hugo Fregonese's action adventure film "Blowing Wild" (1953) with Barbara Stanwyck, he plays a wildcatter in Mexico who gets involved with an oil company executive and his unscrupulous wife with whom he once had an affair. In 1954, Cooper appeared in Henry Hathaway's Western drama "Garden of Evil" with Susan Hayward, about three soldiers of fortune in Mexico hired to rescue a woman's husband. That same year, he appeared in Robert Aldrich's Western adventure "Vera Cruz" with Burt Lancaster. In the film, Cooper plays an American adventurer hired by Emperor Maximilian I to escort a countess to Vera Cruz during the Mexican Rebellion of 1866. All of these films received poor reviews but did well at the box-office. For his work in "Vera Cruz", Cooper earned $1.4 million in salary and percent of the gross.

During this period, Cooper struggled with health problems. As well as his ongoing treatment for ulcers, he suffered a severe shoulder injury during the filming of "Blowing Wild" when he was hit by metal fragments from a dynamited oil well. During the filming of "Vera Cruz", he reinjured his hip falling from a horse, and was burned when Lancaster fired his rifle too close and the wadding from the blank shell pierced his clothing. In 1955, he appeared in Otto Preminger's biographical war drama "The Court-Martial of Billy Mitchell", about the World War I general who tried to convince government officials of the importance of air power, and was court-martialed after blaming the War Department for a series of air disasters. Some critics felt that Cooper was miscast, and that his dull, tight-lipped performance did not reflect Mitchell's dynamic and caustic personality. In 1956, Cooper was more effective playing a gentle Indiana Quaker in William Wyler's Civil War drama "Friendly Persuasion" with Dorothy McGuire. Like "Sergeant York" and "High Noon", the film addresses the conflict between religious pacifism and civic duty. For his performance, Cooper received his second Golden Globe nomination for Best Motion Picture Actor. The film was nominated for six Academy Awards, was awarded the Palme d'Or at the 1957 Cannes Film Festival, and went on to earn $8 million worldwide.

In 1956, Cooper traveled to France to make Billy Wilder's romantic comedy "Love in the Afternoon" with Audrey Hepburn and Maurice Chevalier. In the film, Cooper plays a middle-aged American playboy in Paris who pursues and eventually falls in love with a much younger woman. Despite receiving some positive reviews—including from Bosley Crowther who praised the film's "charming performances"—most reviewers concluded that Cooper was simply too old for the part. While audiences may not have welcomed seeing Cooper's heroic screen image tarnished by his playing an aging roué trying to seduce an innocent young girl, the film was still a box-office success. The following year, Cooper appeared in Philip Dunne's romantic drama "Ten North Frederick". In the film, which was based on the novel by John O'Hara, Cooper plays an attorney whose life is ruined by a double-crossing politician and his own secret affair with his daughter's young roommate. While Cooper brought "conviction and controlled anguish" to his performance, according to biographer Jeffrey Meyers, it was not enough to save what Bosley Crowther called a "hapless film".

Despite his ongoing health problems and several operations for ulcers and hernias, Cooper continued to work in action films. In 1958, he appeared in Anthony Mann's Western drama "Man of the West" (1958) with Julie London and Lee J. Cobb, about a reformed outlaw and killer who is forced to confront his violent past when the train he is riding in is held up by his former gang members. The film has been called Cooper's "most pathological Western", with its themes of impotent rage, sexual humiliation, and sadism. According to biographer Jeffrey Meyers, Cooper, who struggled with moral conflicts in his personal life, "understood the anguish of a character striving to retain his integrity ... [and] brought authentic feeling to the role of a tempted and tormented, yet essentially decent man". Mostly ignored by critics at the time, the film is now well-regarded by film scholars and is considered Cooper's last great film.

After his Warner Bros. contract ended, Cooper formed his own production company, Baroda Productions, and made three unusual films in 1959 about redemption. In Delmer Daves' Western drama "The Hanging Tree", Cooper plays a frontier doctor who saves a criminal from a lynch mob, and later tries to exploit his sordid past. Cooper delivered a "powerful and persuasive" performance of an emotionally scarred man whose need to dominate others is transformed by the love and sacrifice of a woman. In Robert Rossen's historical adventure "They Came to Cordura" with Rita Hayworth, he plays an army officer who is found guilty of cowardice and assigned the degrading task of recommending soldiers for the Medal of Honor during the Pancho Villa Expedition of 1916. While Cooper received positive reviews, "Variety" and "Films in Review" felt he was too old for the part. In Michael Anderson's action drama "The Wreck of the Mary Deare" with Charlton Heston, Cooper plays a disgraced merchant marine officer who decides to stay aboard his sinking cargo ship in order to prove the vessel was deliberately scuttled and to redeem his good name. Like its two predecessors, the film was physically demanding. Cooper, who was a trained scuba diver, did most of his own underwater scenes. Biographer Jeffrey Meyers observed that in all three roles, Cooper effectively conveyed the sense of lost honor and desire for redemption—what Joseph Conrad in "Lord Jim" called the "struggles of an individual trying to save from the fire his idea of what his moral identity should be".

Cooper was formally introduced to his future wife, twenty-year-old New York debutante Veronica Balfe, on Easter Sunday 1933 at a party given by her uncle, art director Cedric Gibbons. Called "Rocky" by her family and friends, she grew up on Park Avenue and attended finishing schools. Her stepfather was Wall Street tycoon Paul Shields. Cooper and Rocky were quietly married at her parents' Park Avenue residence on December 15, 1933. According to his friends, the marriage had a positive impact on Cooper, who turned away from past indiscretions and took control of his life. Athletic and a lover of the outdoors, Rocky shared many of Cooper's interests, including riding, skiing, and skeet-shooting. She organized their social life, and her wealth and social connections provided Cooper access to New York high society. Cooper and his wife owned homes in the Los Angeles area in Encino (1933–36), Brentwood (1936–53), and Holmby Hills (1954–61), and owned a vacation home in Aspen, Colorado (1949–53).

Gary and Veronica Cooper's daughter, Maria Veronica Cooper, was born on September 15, 1937. By all accounts, he was a patient and affectionate father, teaching Maria to ride a bicycle, play tennis, ski, and ride horses. Sharing many of her parents' interests, she accompanied them on their travels and was often photographed with them. Like her father, she developed a love for art and drawing. As a family they vacationed together in Sun Valley, Idaho, spent time at Rocky's parents' country house in Southampton, New York, and took frequent trips to Europe. Cooper and Rocky were legally separated on May 16, 1951, when Cooper moved out of their home. For over two years, they maintained a fragile and uneasy family life with their daughter. Cooper moved back into their home in November 1953, and their formal reconciliation occurred in February 1954.

Prior to his marriage, Cooper had a series of romantic relationships with leading actresses, beginning in 1927 with Clara Bow, who advanced his career by helping him get one of his first leading roles in "Children of Divorce". Bow was also responsible for getting Cooper a role in "Wings", which generated an enormous amount of fan mail for the young actor. In 1928, he had a relationship with another experienced actress, Evelyn Brent, whom he met while filming "Beau Sabreur". In 1929, while filming "The Wolf Song", Cooper began an intense affair with Lupe Vélez, which was the most important romance of his early life. During their two years together, Cooper also had brief affairs with Marlene Dietrich while filming "Morocco" in 1930 and with Carole Lombard while making "I Take This Woman" in 1931. During his year abroad in 1931–32, Cooper had an affair with the married Countess Dorothy di Frasso, while staying at her Villa Madama in Rome.

After he was married in December 1933, Cooper remained faithful to his wife until the summer of 1942, when he began an affair with Ingrid Bergman during the production of "For Whom the Bell Tolls". Their relationship lasted through the completion of filming "Saratoga Trunk" in June 1943. In 1948, after finishing work on "The Fountainhead", Cooper began an affair with actress Patricia Neal, his co-star. At first they kept their affair discreet, but eventually it became an open secret in Hollywood, and Cooper's wife confronted him with the rumors, which he admitted were true. He also confessed that he was in love with Neal, and continued to see her. Cooper and his wife were legally separated in May 1951, but he did not seek a divorce. Neal later claimed that Cooper hit her after she went on a date with Kirk Douglas, and that he arranged for her to have an abortion when she became pregnant with Cooper's child. Neal ended their relationship in late December 1951. During his three-year separation from his wife, Cooper was rumored to have had affairs with Grace Kelly, Lorraine Chanel, and Gisèle Pascal.

Cooper's twenty-year friendship with Ernest Hemingway began at Sun Valley in October 1940. The previous year, Hemingway drew upon Cooper's image when he created the character of Robert Jordan for the novel "For Whom the Bell Tolls". The two shared a passion for the outdoors, and for years they hunted duck and pheasant, and skied together in Sun Valley. Both men admired the work of Rudyard Kipling—Cooper kept a copy of the poem "If—" in his dressing room—and retained as adults Kipling's sense of boyish adventure. As well as admiring Cooper's hunting skills and knowledge of the outdoors, Hemingway believed his character matched his screen persona, once telling a friend, "If you made up a character like Coop, nobody would believe it. He's just too good to be true." They saw each other often, and their friendship remained strong through the years.

Cooper's social life generally centered on sports, outdoor activities, and dinner parties with his family and friends from the film industry, including directors Henry Hathaway, Howard Hawks, William Wellman, and Fred Zinnemann, and actors Joel McCrea, James Stewart, Barbara Stanwyck, and Robert Taylor. As well as hunting, Cooper enjoyed riding, fishing, skiing, and later in life, scuba diving. He never abandoned his early love for art and drawing, and over the years, he and his wife acquired a private collection of modern paintings, including works by Pierre-Auguste Renoir, Paul Gauguin, and Georgia O'Keeffe. Cooper owned several works by Pablo Picasso, whom he met in 1956. Cooper also had a lifelong passion for automobiles, with a collection that included a 1930 Duesenberg.

Cooper was naturally reserved and introspective, and loved the solitude of outdoor activities. Not unlike his screen persona, his communication style frequently consisted of long silences with an occasional "yup" and "shucks". He once said, "If others have more interesting things to say than I have, I keep quiet." According to his friends, Cooper could also be an articulate, well-informed conversationalist on topics ranging from horses, guns, and Western history to film production, sports cars, and modern art. He was modest and unpretentious, frequently downplaying his acting abilities and career accomplishments. His friends and colleagues described him as charming, well-mannered, and thoughtful, with a lively boyish sense of humor. Cooper maintained a sense of propriety throughout his career and never misused his movie star status—never sought special treatment or refused to work with a director or leading lady. His close friend Joel McCrea recalled, "Coop never fought, he never got mad, he never told anybody off that I know of; everybody that worked with him liked him."

Cooper was a conservative Republican like his father, and voted for Calvin Coolidge in 1924, Herbert Hoover in 1928 and 1932, and campaigned for Wendell Willkie in 1940. When Franklin D. Roosevelt ran for an unprecedented fourth presidential term in 1944, Cooper campaigned for Thomas E. Dewey and criticized Roosevelt for being dishonest and adopting "foreign" ideas. In a radio address that he paid for himself just prior to the election, Cooper said, "I disagree with the New Deal belief that the America all of us love is old and worn-out and finished—and has to borrow foreign notions that don't even seem to work any too well where they come from ... Our country is a young country that just has to make up its mind to be itself again." He also attended a Republican rally at the Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum that drew 93,000 Dewey supporters.

Cooper was one of the founding members of the Motion Picture Alliance for the Preservation of American Ideals, a conservative organization dedicated, according to its statement of principles, to preserving the "American way of life" and opposing communism and fascism. The organization — whose membership included Walter Brennan, Laraine Day, Walt Disney, Clark Gable, Hedda Hopper, Ronald Reagan, Barbara Stanwyck, and John Wayne — advised the United States Congress to investigate communist influence in the motion picture industry. On October 23, 1947, Cooper appeared before the House Un-American Activities Committee (HUAC) and was asked if he had observed any "communistic influence" in Hollywood. Cooper recounted statements he'd heard suggesting that the Constitution was out of date and that Congress was an unnecessary institution—comments that Cooper said he found to be "very un-American". He also testified that he had rejected several scripts because he thought they were "tinged with communist ideas". Unlike some other witnesses, Cooper did not name any individuals during his testimony.

Cooper was baptized in the Anglican Church in December 1911 in England, and was raised in the Episcopal Church in the United States. While he was never an observant Christian during his adult life, many of his friends believed he had a deeply spiritual side.

On June 26, 1953, Cooper accompanied his wife and daughter, who were devout Catholics, to Rome, where they had an audience with Pope Pius XII. Cooper and his wife were still separated at the time, but the papal visit marked the beginning of their gradual reconciliation. In the coming years, Cooper contemplated his mortality and his personal behavior, and started discussing Catholicism with his family. He began attending church with them regularly, and met with their parish priest, who offered Cooper spiritual guidance. After several months of study, Cooper was baptized as a Roman Catholic on April 9, 1959, before a small group of family and friends at the Church of the Good Shepherd in Beverly Hills.

On April 14, 1960, Cooper underwent surgery at Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston for an aggressive form of prostate cancer which had metastasized to his colon. He fell ill again on May 31 and underwent further surgery at Lebanon Hospital in Los Angeles in early June to remove a malignant tumor from his large intestine. After recuperating over the summer, Cooper took his family on vacation to the south of France before traveling to England in the fall to make his last film, "The Naked Edge". In December 1960, he worked on the NBC television documentary "The Real West", which was part of the company's "Project 20" series. On December 27, his wife learned from their family doctor that Cooper's cancer had spread to his lungs and bones and was inoperable. His family decided not to tell him immediately.

On January 9, 1961, Cooper attended a dinner given in his honor at the Friars Club hosted by Frank Sinatra and Dean Martin. Attended by many of his industry friends, the dinner concluded with a brief speech by Cooper who said, "The only achievement I'm proud of is the friends I've made in this community." In mid-January, Cooper took his family to Sun Valley for their last vacation together. Cooper and Hemingway hiked through the snow together for the last time. On February 27, after returning to Los Angeles, Cooper learned that he was dying. He later told his family, "We'll pray for a miracle; but if not, and that's God's will, that's all right too." On April 17, Cooper watched the Academy Awards ceremony on television and saw his good friend James Stewart, who had presented Cooper with his first Oscar years earlier, accept on Cooper's behalf an honorary award for lifetime achievement—his third Oscar. Speaking to Cooper, an emotional Stewart said, "Coop, I want you to know I'll get it to you right away. With it goes all the friendship and affection and the admiration and deep respect of all of us. We're very, very proud of you, Coop." The following day, newspapers around the world announced the news that Cooper was dying. In the coming days he received numerous messages of appreciation and encouragement, including telegrams from Pope John XXIII and Queen Elizabeth II, and a telephone call from President John F. Kennedy.

In his last public statement on May 4, Cooper said, "I know that what is happening is God's will. I am not afraid of the future." He received the last rites on May 12. Cooper died quietly the following day, Saturday, May 13, 1961, at 12:47 pm, six days after his sixtieth birthday. A requiem mass was held on May 18 at the Church of the Good Shepherd, attended by many of Cooper's friends, including James Stewart, Henry Hathaway, Joel McCrea, Audrey Hepburn, Jack L. Warner, John Ford, John Wayne, Edward G. Robinson, Frank Sinatra, Dean Martin, Randolph Scott, Walter Pidgeon, Bob Hope and Marlene Dietrich. Cooper was buried in the Grotto of Our Lady of Lourdes in Holy Cross Cemetery in Culver City, California. In May 1974, after his family relocated to New York, Cooper's remains were exhumed and reburied in Sacred Hearts Cemetery in Southampton. His grave is marked by a three-ton boulder from a Montauk quarry.

Cooper's acting style consisted of three essential characteristics: his ability to project elements of his own personality onto the characters he portrayed, to appear natural and authentic in his roles, and to underplay and deliver restrained performances calibrated for the camera and the screen. Acting teacher Lee Strasberg once observed: "The simplest examples of Stanislavsky's ideas are actors such as Gary Cooper, John Wayne, and Spencer Tracy. They try not to act but to be themselves, to respond or react. They refuse to say or do anything they feel not to be consonant with their own characters." Film director François Truffaut ranked Cooper among "the greatest actors" because of his ability to deliver great performances "without direction". This ability to project elements of his own personality onto his characters produced a continuity across his performances to the extent that critics and audiences were convinced that he was simply "playing himself".

Cooper's ability to project his personality onto his characters played an important part in his appearing natural and authentic on screen. Actor John Barrymore said of Cooper, "This fellow is the world's greatest actor. He does without effort what the rest of us spend our lives trying to learn—namely, to be natural." Charles Laughton, who played opposite Cooper in "Devil and the Deep" agreed, "In truth, that boy hasn't the least idea how well he acts ... He gets at it from the inside, from his own clear way of looking at life." William Wyler, who directed Cooper in two films, called him a "superb actor, a master of movie acting". In his review of Cooper's performance in "The Real Glory", Graham Greene wrote, "Sometimes his lean photogenic face seems to leave everything to the lens, but there is no question here of his not acting. Watch him inoculate the girl against cholera—the casual jab of the needle, and the dressing slapped on while he talks, as though a thousand arms had taught him where to stab and he doesn't have to think anymore."

Cooper's style of underplaying before the camera surprised many of his directors and fellow actors. Even in his earliest feature films, he recognized the camera's ability to pick up slight gestures and facial movements. Commenting on Cooper's performance in "Sergeant York", director Howard Hawks observed, "He worked very hard and yet he didn't seem to be working. He was a strange actor because you'd look at him during a scene and you'd think ... this isn't going to be any good. But when you saw the rushes in the projection room the next day you could read in his face all the things he'd been thinking." Sam Wood, who directed Cooper in four films, had similar observations about Cooper's performance in "Pride of the Yankees", noting, "What I thought was underplaying turned out to be just the right approach. On the screen he's perfect, yet on the set you'd swear it's the worst job of acting in the history of motion pictures." His fellow actors also admired his abilities as an actor. Commenting on her two films playing opposite Cooper, actress Ingrid Bergman concluded, "The personality of this man was so enormous, so overpowering—and that expression in his eyes and his face, it was so delicate and so underplayed. You just didn't notice it until you saw it on the screen. I thought he was marvelous; the most underplaying and the most natural actor I ever worked with."

Cooper's career spanned thirty-six years, from 1925 to 1961. During that time, he appeared in eighty-four feature films in a leading role. He was a major movie star from the end of the silent film era to the end of the golden age of Classical Hollywood. His natural and authentic acting style appealed powerfully to both men and women, and his range of performances included roles in most major movie genres, including Westerns, war films, adventure films, drama films, crime films, romance films, comedy films, and romantic comedy films. He appeared on the "Motion Picture Herald" exhibitor's poll of top ten film personalities for twenty-three consecutive years, from 1936 to 1958. According to Quigley's annual poll, Cooper was one of the top money-making stars for eighteen years, appearing in the top ten in 1936–37, 1941–49, and 1951–57. He topped the list in 1953. In Quigley's list of all-time money-making stars, Cooper is listed fourth, after John Wayne, Clint Eastwood, and Tom Cruise. At the time of his death, it was estimated that his films grossed well over $200 million (equivalent to $ billion in ).

In over half of his feature films, Cooper portrayed Westerners, soldiers, pilots, sailors, and explorers—all men of action. In the rest he played a wide range of characters, included doctors, professors, artists, architects, clerks, and baseball players. Cooper's heroic screen image changed with each period of his career. In his early films, he played the young naive hero sure of his moral position and trusting in the triumph of simple virtues ("The Virginian"). After becoming a major star, his Western screen persona was replaced by a more cautious hero in adventure films and dramas ("A Farewell to Arms"). During the height of his career, from 1936 to 1943, he played a new type of hero—a champion of the common man willing to sacrifice himself for others ("Mr. Deeds", "Meet John Doe", and "For Whom the Bell Tolls"). In the post-war years, Cooper attempted broader variations on his screen image, which now reflected a hero increasingly at odds with the world who must face adversity alone ("The Fountainhead" and "High Noon"). In his final films, Cooper's hero rejects the violence of the past, and seeks to reclaim lost honor and find redemption ("Friendly Persuasion" and "Man of the West"). The screen persona he developed and sustained throughout his career represented the ideal American hero—a tall, handsome, and sincere man of steadfast integrity who emphasized action over intellect, and combined the heroic qualities of the romantic lover, the adventurer, and the common man.

On February 6, 1960, Cooper was awarded a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame at 6243 Hollywood Boulevard for his contribution to the film industry. He was also awarded a star on the sidewalk outside the Ellen Theater in Bozeman, Montana. On May 6, 1961, he was awarded the French Order of Arts and Letters in recognition of his significant contribution to the arts. On July 30, 1961, he was posthumously awarded the David di Donatello Special Award in Italy for his career achievements. In 1966, he was inducted into the Hall of Great Western Performers at the National Cowboy & Western Heritage Museum in Oklahoma City. In 2015, he was inducted into the Utah Cowboy and Western Heritage Hall of Fame. The American Film Institute (AFI) ranked Cooper eleventh on its list of the 25 male stars of classic Hollywood. Three of his characters—Will Kane, Lou Gehrig, and Sergeant York—made AFI's list of the one hundred greatest heroes and villains, all of them as heroes. His Lou Gehrig line, "Today, I consider myself the luckiest man on the face of the earth.", is ranked by AFI as the thirty-eighth greatest movie quote of all time. More than a half century after his death, Cooper's enduring legacy, according to biographer Jeffrey Meyers, is his image of the ideal American hero preserved in his film performances. Charlton Heston once observed, "He projected the kind of man Americans would like to be, probably more than any actor that's ever lived."

The following is a list of feature films in which Cooper appeared in a leading role.



</doc>
<doc id="168480" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=168480" title="Ben Kingsley">
Ben Kingsley

Sir Ben Kingsley (born Krishna Pandit Bhanji; 31 December 1943) is an English actor with a career spanning over 50 years. He has won an Oscar, Grammy, BAFTA, two Golden Globes, and a Screen Actors Guild Award. He is known for his starring role as Mohandas Gandhi in the 1982 film "Gandhi", for which he won the Academy Award for Best Actor. He is also known for his performances in the films "Schindler's List" (1993), "Twelfth Night" (1996), "Sexy Beast" (2000), "House of Sand and Fog" (2003), "Lucky Number Slevin" (2006), "Shutter Island" (2010), "" (2010), "Hugo" (2011), "Iron Man 3" (2013), "The Boxtrolls" (2014), and "The Jungle Book" (2016).

Kingsley was made a Knight Bachelor at Buckingham Palace in 2002 for services to the British film industry. In 2010, he was awarded a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame. In 2013, he received the BAFTA Los Angeles Britannia Award for Worldwide Contribution to Filmed Entertainment.

Kingsley was born Krishna Pandit Bhanji in Snainton, North Riding of Yorkshire. He is the son of Anna Lyna Mary (born Goodman; 1914–2010), an actress and model who appeared in films in the 1920s and 1930s, and Rahimtulla Harji Bhanji (1914–1968), a medical doctor.

Kingsley's father, born in Kenya, was of Gujarati descent. Kingsley's paternal grandfather was an extremely successful spice trader who had moved from India to Zanzibar, where Kingsley's father lived until moving to Britain at the age of 14. Kingsley's mother was British; she was born out of wedlock, and "was loath to speak of her background". Kingsley's maternal grandfather was believed by the family to have been of Russian- or German-Jewish descent, while Kingsley's maternal grandmother was of English background, and worked in the garment district of East London. Kingsley stated in 1994: "I'm not Jewish... and though there might be some Russian-Jewish heritage way back on my mother's side, the thread is so fine there's no real evidence".

Kingsley grew up in Pendlebury, near Manchester. He was educated at Manchester Grammar School, where one of his classmates was the actor Robert Powell.

Kingsley studied at Pendleton College, which later became home to the Ben Kingsley Theatre. While at college he became involved in amateur dramatics in Manchester, making his professional stage debut on graduation, aged 23. In 1967, he made his London West End theatre debut at the Aldwych Theatre. Later, he was spotted by music producer and manager Dick James, who offered to mould Kingsley into a pop star, but Kingsley chose to join the Royal Shakespeare Company after an audition before Trevor Nunn.

Devoting himself almost exclusively to stage work for the next 15 years, he made his Broadway debut in 1971 with the RSC. Kingsley played Mosca in Peter Hall's 1977 production of Ben Jonson's "Volpone" for the Royal National Theatre, and in Peter Brook's acclaimed production of "A Midsummer Night's Dream". At about this time, he changed his name to Ben Kingsley, fearing that a foreign name would hamper his career. He took his stage name from his father's nickname (at Dulwich College) of "Benji" and his paternal grandfather's nickname of "King Cloves". He also starred in the role of Willy Loman in a 1982 Sydney production of "Death of a Salesman" opposite Mel Gibson.

Kingsley made the transition to film roles early on, with his first role coming in "Fear Is the Key", released in 1972. Kingsley continued starring in bit roles in both film and television, including a role as Ron Jenkins on the soap opera "Coronation Street" from 1966 to 1967 and regular appearances as a defence counsel in the long-running British legal programme "Crown Court". In 1975, he starred as Dante Gabriel Rossetti in the BBCs historical drama "The Love School" and appeared in the TV miniseries "Dickens of London" the following year. He found fame only years later, starring as Mohandas Gandhi in the Academy Award-winning film "Gandhi" in 1982. The film was a critical and financial success, and Kingsley won the Academy Award for Best Actor for his performance.

Kingsley has since appeared in a variety of roles. His credits included the films "Turtle Diary", "Maurice", "Pascali's Island", "Without a Clue" (as Dr. Watson alongside Michael Caine's Sherlock Holmes), "Suspect Zero", "Bugsy" (nominated for Best Supporting Actor), "Sneakers", "Dave", "Searching for Bobby Fischer", "Schindler's List", "Silas Marner", "Death and the Maiden", "Sexy Beast", for which he received another Academy Award nomination for Best Supporting Actor, and "House of Sand and Fog", which led to an Oscar nomination for Best Actor. He won a Crystal Globe award for outstanding artistic contribution to world cinema at the Karlovy Vary International Film Festival in 2001.

In 1997, he provided voice talent for the video game "Ceremony of Innocence". In 1998, he was the head of the jury at the 48th Berlin International Film Festival.

In July 2006, he received an Emmy nomination for his performance in the made-for-TV film "Mrs. Harris", in which he played famed cardiologist Herman Tarnower, who was murdered by his jilted lover, Jean Harris. Later that year, Kingsley appeared in an episode of "The Sopranos" entitled "Luxury Lounge", playing himself. In 2007, Kingsley appeared as a Polish American mobster in the Mafia comedy "You Kill Me", and a hitman in "War, Inc."

In 2010, Kingsley worked voicing a character named Sabine in Lionhead Studios game "Fable III" and starred alongside Leonardo DiCaprio in "Shutter Island", directed by Martin Scorsese. He also appeared in Scorsese's next film, "Hugo", and signed up to appear in a new feature by Neil Jordan and John Boorman entitled "Broken Dream".

In 2013, he appeared as Trevor Slattery in "Iron Man 3", and as the hero Mazer Rackham in "Ender's Game".

Kingsley's 2014 film roles included "", as Nun, a Hebrew slave, and "", as Merenkahre, a simulacrum of an Egyptian pharaoh (in one scene, the character discusses his Hebrew slaves).

In 2015, Kingsley played a driving instructor in the film "Learning to Drive". He voiced Bagheera in Disney's reboot of "The Jungle Book", and recorded Yogananda's "Autobiography of a Yogi" in book-on-tape format.

Kingsley has been married four times and has four children: Thomas Bhanji and artist Jasmin Bhanji, with actress Angela Morant; and Edmund Kingsley and Ferdinand Kingsley, both of whom became actors, with theatrical director Alison Sutcliffe. He divorced Alexandra Christmann, originally from Germany, in 2005, having been "deeply, deeply shocked" after pictures of her kissing another man surfaced on the internet. On 3 September 2007, Kingsley married Daniela Lavender, a Brazilian actress, at Eynsham Hall, in North Leigh, Oxfordshire.

Kingsley was created a Knight Bachelor in the 2002 New Year Honours for services to the British film industry. The award was announced on 31 December 2001, which happened to be Kingsley's 58th birthday. After receiving his award from Elizabeth II at Buckingham Palace, Kingsley stated; "I told the Queen that winning an Oscar pales into insignificance – this is insurmountable. I'm fascinated by the ancient, by mythology, by these islands and their tradition of story telling. I feel that I am a story teller and to receive a knighthood is really recognition of that." His demand to be called 'Sir' was documented by the BBC, to some criticism. Since then, Kingsley appears to have altered his stance; credits for his latest films refer to him as Ben Kingsley. Co-star Penélope Cruz was reportedly unsure what to call him during the filming of "Elegy" as someone had told her she needed to refer to him as "Sir Ben". One day it slipped out as such, and she called him that for the remainder of the shoot. Kingsley has denied accusations that he prefers to be referred to by his title, saying, "If I've ever insisted on being called 'Sir' by colleagues on a film set then I am profoundly sorry. I don't remember ever doing that and I tend not to forget."

In 1984, he won a Grammy Award for Best Spoken Word or Nonmusical Recording for "The Words of Gandhi". He was awarded the Indian civilian honour Padma Shri in 1984.
In May 2010, Kingsley was awarded a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame.
In April 2013, Kingsley was honoured with the Fellowship Award at The Asian Awards in London.



</doc>
<doc id="171003" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=171003" title="Daniel Day-Lewis">
Daniel Day-Lewis

Sir Daniel Michael Blake Day-Lewis (born 29 April 1957) is an English actor who holds both British and Irish citizenship. Born and raised in London, he excelled on stage at the National Youth Theatre, before being accepted at the Bristol Old Vic Theatre School, which he attended for three years. 

Despite his traditional training at the Bristol Old Vic, Day-Lewis is considered a method actor, known for his constant devotion to and research of his roles. He would often remain completely in character for the duration of the shooting schedules of his films, even to the point of adversely affecting his health. He is one of the most selective actors in the film industry, having starred in only six films since 1998, with as many as five years between roles. Protective of his private life, he rarely gives interviews and makes very few public appearances. In June 2014, he received a knighthood for services to drama. Day-Lewis announced his retirement in 2017, following the completion of his acting role in "Phantom Thread".

Day-Lewis shifted between theatre and film for most of the early 1980s, joining the Royal Shakespeare Company and playing Romeo in "Romeo and Juliet" and Flute in "A Midsummer Night's Dream", before appearing in the 1984 film "The Bounty". He starred in "My Beautiful Laundrette" (1985), his first critically acclaimed role, and gained further public notice with "A Room with a View" (1985). He then assumed leading man status with "The Unbearable Lightness of Being" (1988).

One of the most acclaimed actors in film history, Day-Lewis has earned numerous awards, including three Academy Awards for Best Actor for his performances in "My Left Foot" (1989), "There Will Be Blood" (2007) and "Lincoln" (2012), making him the only male actor in history to have three wins in the lead actor category and one of only three male actors to win three Oscars. He was also nominated in this category for "In the Name of the Father" (1993), "Gangs of New York" (2002) and "Phantom Thread" (2017). He has also won four BAFTA Awards for Best Actor, three Screen Actors Guild Awards and two Golden Globe Awards. In November 2012, "Time" named Day-Lewis the "World's Greatest Actor".

Daniel Michael Blake Day-Lewis was born on 29 April 1957 in Kensington, London, the second child of poet Cecil Day-Lewis (1904–1972) and his second wife, actress Jill Balcon (1925–2009). His older sister, Tamasin Day-Lewis (born 1953), is a television chef and food critic. His father, who was born in the Irish town of Ballintubbert, County Laois, was of Protestant Anglo-Irish descent, lived in England from the age of two, and was appointed Poet Laureate of the United Kingdom. Day-Lewis' mother was Jewish; her ancestors were immigrants to England in the late 19th century, from Latvia and Poland. His maternal grandfather, Sir Michael Balcon, became the head of Ealing Studios, helping develop the new British film industry.

Two years after Day-Lewis' birth, he moved with his family to Croom's Hill in Greenwich. He and his older sister did not see much of their older two half-brothers, who had been teenagers when Day-Lewis' father divorced their mother. Living in Greenwich (he attended Invicta and Sherington Primary Schools), Day-Lewis had to deal with tough South London children. Identified as Jewish and "posh", he was often bullied. He mastered the local accent and mannerisms, and credits that as being his first convincing performance. Later in life, he has been known to speak of himself as very much a disorderly character in his younger years, often in trouble for shoplifting and other petty crimes.

In 1968, Day-Lewis' parents, finding his behaviour to be too wild, sent him as a boarder to the independent Sevenoaks School in Kent. At the school, he was introduced to his three most prominent interests: woodworking, acting, and fishing. However, his disdain for the school grew, and after two years at Sevenoaks, he was transferred to another independent school, Bedales in Petersfield, Hampshire. His sister was already a student there, and it had a more relaxed and creative ethos. He made his film debut at the age of 14 in "Sunday Bloody Sunday", in which he played a vandal in an uncredited role. He described the experience as "heaven" for getting paid £2 to vandalise expensive cars parked outside his local church.

For a few weeks in 1972, the Day-Lewis family lived at Lemmons, the north London home of Kingsley Amis and Elizabeth Jane Howard. Day-Lewis' father had pancreatic cancer and Howard invited the family to Lemmons as a place they could use to rest and recuperate. His father died there in May that year. By the time he left Bedales in 1975, Day-Lewis' unruly attitude had diminished and he needed to make a career choice. Although he had excelled on stage at the National Youth Theatre in London, he applied for a five-year apprenticeship as a cabinet-maker. He was rejected due to lack of experience. He was accepted at the Bristol Old Vic Theatre School, which he attended for three years along with Miranda Richardson, eventually performing at the Bristol Old Vic itself. At one point he played understudy to Pete Postlethwaite, with whom he would later co-star in the film "In the Name of the Father" (1994).

John Hartoch, Day-Lewis' acting teacher at Bristol Old Vic, recalled:

During the early 1980s, Day-Lewis worked in theatre and television including "Frost in May" (where he played an impotent man-child) and "How Many Miles to Babylon?" (as a World War I officer torn between allegiances to Britain and Ireland) for the BBC. Eleven years after his film debut, Day-Lewis had a small part in the film "Gandhi" (1982) as Colin, a South African street thug who racially bullies the title character. In late 1982 he had his big theatre break when he took over the lead in "Another Country", which had premiered in late 1981. Next he took on a supporting role as the conflicted, but ultimately loyal first mate in "The Bounty" (1984). He next joined the Royal Shakespeare Company, playing Romeo in "Romeo and Juliet" and Flute in "A Midsummer Night's Dream".

In 1985, Day-Lewis gave his first critically acclaimed performance playing a young gay English man in an interracial relationship with a Pakistani youth in the film "My Beautiful Laundrette". Directed by Stephen Frears and written by Hanif Kureishi, the film is set in 1980s London during Margaret Thatcher's tenure as Prime Minister. It is the first of three Day-Lewis films to appear in the BFI's 100 greatest British films of the 20th century, ranking 50th.

Day-Lewis gained further public notice that year with "A Room with a View" (1985), based on the novel by E. M. Forster. Set in the Edwardian period of turn-of-the-20th-century England, he portrayed an entirely different character: Cecil Vyse, the proper upper-class fiancé of the main character. In 1987, Day-Lewis assumed leading man status by starring in Philip Kaufman's adaptation of Milan Kundera's "The Unbearable Lightness of Being", in which he portrayed a Czech surgeon whose hyperactive sex life is thrown into disarray when he allows himself to become emotionally involved with a woman. During the eight-month shoot he learned Czech and first began to refuse to break character on or off the set for the entire shooting schedule. During this period, Day-Lewis and other young British actors of the time, such as Gary Oldman, Colin Firth, Tim Roth, and Bruce Payne, were dubbed the "Brit Pack".

Day-Lewis threw his personal version of method acting into full throttle in 1989 with his performance as Christy Brown in Jim Sheridan's "My Left Foot". It garnered him numerous awards, including the Academy Award for Best Actor and BAFTA Award for Best Actor. Brown, known as a writer and painter, was born with cerebral palsy and was able to control only his left foot. Day-Lewis prepared for the role by making frequent visits to Sandymount School Clinic in Dublin, where he formed friendships with several people with disabilities, some of whom had no speech. During filming, he again refused to break character. Playing a severely paralysed character on screen, off screen Day-Lewis had to be moved around the set in his wheelchair, and crew members would curse at having to lift him over camera and lighting wires, all so that he might gain insight into all aspects of Brown's life, including the embarrassments. Crew members were also required to spoon-feed him. It was rumoured that he had broken two ribs during filming from assuming a hunched-over position in his wheelchair for so many weeks, something he denied years later at the 2013 Santa Barbara International Film Festival.

Day-Lewis returned to the stage in 1989 to work with Richard Eyre, as the title character in "Hamlet" at the National Theatre, London, but collapsed during the scene where the ghost of Hamlet's father appears before him. He began sobbing uncontrollably and refused to go back on stage; he was replaced by Jeremy Northam, who received a standing ovation. Ian Charleson formally replaced Day-Lewis for the rest of the run, but his ill-health forced Northam to stand in again many times. Although the incident was officially attributed to exhaustion, Day-Lewis later claimed to have seen the ghost of his own father.

He has not appeared on stage since. The media attention following his breakdown on-stage contributed to his decision to eventually move from England to Ireland in the mid-1990s to regain a sense of privacy amidst his increasing fame.

Day-Lewis starred in the American film "The Last of the Mohicans" (1992), based on a novel by James Fenimore Cooper. Day-Lewis' character research for this film was well-publicised; he reportedly underwent rigorous weight training and learned to live off the land and forest where his character lived, camping, hunting and fishing. Day-Lewis also added to his wood-working skills and learned how to make canoes. He carried a long rifle at all times during filming to remain in character and learned how to skin animals.
He returned to work with Jim Sheridan on "In the Name of the Father", in which he played Gerry Conlon, one of the Guildford Four, who were wrongfully convicted of a bombing carried out by the Provisional IRA. He lost for the part, kept his Northern Irish accent on and off the set for the entire shooting schedule, and spent stretches of time in a prison cell. He also insisted that crew members throw cold water at him and verbally abuse him. The film earned him his second Academy Award nomination, third BAFTA nomination, and second Golden Globe nomination.

Day-Lewis returned to the United States in 1993, playing Newland Archer in Martin Scorsese's adaptation of the Edith Wharton novel "The Age of Innocence". To prepare for the film, set in America's Gilded Age, he wore 1870s-period aristocratic clothing around New York City for two months, including top hat, cane and cape.

In 1996, Day-Lewis starred in "The Crucible", a film version of the play by Arthur Miller. During the shoot he met his future wife, Rebecca Miller, the author's daughter. He followed that with Jim Sheridan's "The Boxer", starring as a former boxer and IRA member recently released from prison. His preparation included training with former boxing world champion Barry McGuigan, and attending professional boxing matches such as the "Nigel Benn vs. Gerald McClellan" world title fight at London Arena.

Following "The Boxer", Day-Lewis took a leave of absence from acting by going into "semi-retirement" and returning to his old passion of woodworking. He moved to Florence, Italy, where he became intrigued by the craft of shoemaking. He apprenticed to as a shoemaker with Stefano Bemer. For a time his exact whereabouts and actions were not made publicly known.

After a five-year absence from filming, Day-Lewis returned to act in "Gangs of New York" (2002), directed by Scorsese and produced by Harvey Weinstein. In his role as the villainous gang leader William "Bill the Butcher" Cutting, he starred alongside Leonardo DiCaprio, who played Bill's young protégé. He began his lengthy, self-disciplined process by taking lessons as an apprentice butcher, hiring a butcher from Peckham, south London to instruct him in carving up carcasses. He also hired circus performers to teach him to throw knives. While filming, he was never out of character between takes (including keeping his character's New York accent). At one point during filming, having been diagnosed with pneumonia, he refused to wear a warmer coat or to take treatment because it was not in keeping with the period; however, he was eventually persuaded to seek medical treatment. His performance in "Gangs of New York" earned him his third Academy Award nomination and won him his second BAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Leading Role.
After "Gangs of New York", Day-Lewis' wife, director Rebecca Miller, offered him the lead role in her film "The Ballad of Jack and Rose", in which he played a dying man with regrets over how his life had evolved and over how he had brought up his teenage daughter. During filming he arranged to live separately from his wife to achieve the "isolation" needed to focus on his own character's reality. The film received mixed reviews.

In 2007, Day-Lewis starred in director Paul Thomas Anderson's loose adaptation of the Upton Sinclair novel "Oil!", titled "There Will Be Blood". Day-Lewis received the Academy Award for Best Actor, BAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Leading Role, Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Motion Picture Drama, Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Male Actor in a Leading Role (which he dedicated to Heath Ledger, saying that he was inspired by Ledger's acting and calling the actor's performance in "Brokeback Mountain" "unique, perfect"), and a variety of film critics' circle awards for the role. In winning the Best Actor Oscar, Day-Lewis joined Marlon Brando and Jack Nicholson as the only Best Actor winners awarded an Oscar in two non-consecutive decades.

In 2009, Day-Lewis starred in Rob Marshall's musical adaptation "Nine" as film director Guido Contini. Day-Lewis was nominated for the Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy and the Satellite Award for Best Actor – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy for his role, as well as sharing nominations for the Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Cast in a Motion Picture and the Broadcast Film Critics Association Award for Best Cast and the Satellite Award for Best Cast – Motion Picture with the rest of the cast members.
Day-Lewis played Abraham Lincoln in Steven Spielberg's film "Lincoln" (2012). Based on the book "Team of Rivals: The Political Genius of Abraham Lincoln", the film began shooting in Richmond, Virginia in October 2011. Day-Lewis spent a year in preparation for the role, a time he had requested from Spielberg. He read over 100 books on Lincoln, and long worked with the makeup artist to achieve a physical likeness to Lincoln. "Lincoln" received widespread critical acclaim, much of it directed at Day-Lewis' performance. It also became a commercial success, grossing over $275 million worldwide. In November 2012, Day-Lewis received the BAFTA Britannia Award for Excellence in Film.
At the 70th Golden Globe Awards on 14 January 2013, Day-Lewis won his second Golden Globe Award for Best Actor, and at the 66th British Academy Film Awards on 10 February, he won his fourth BAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Leading Role. At the 85th Academy Awards, Day-Lewis became the first three-time recipient of the Best Actor Oscar for his role in "Lincoln". John Hartoch, Day-Lewis' acting teacher at Bristol Old Vic theatre school, lauded his achievement, 

Following his historic third Oscar win, there was much debate about Day-Lewis' standing among the greatest actors in the history of cinema. Joe Queenan in "The Guardian" stated, "Arguing whether Daniel Day-Lewis is a greater actor than Laurence Olivier, or Richard Burton, or Marlon Brando, is like arguing whether Messi is more talented than Pelé, whether Napoleon Bonaparte edges out Alexander the Great as a military genius." Day-Lewis himself when asked what it was like to be "the world's greatest actor", responded "It's daft isn't it? It changes all the time". Shortly after winning the Oscar for "Lincoln", Day-Lewis announced he would be taking a break from acting, retreating back to his Georgian farmhouse in County Wicklow for the next five years, before making another film.

After a five year hiatus, Day-Lewis returned to the screen to star in Paul Thomas Anderson's historical drama "Phantom Thread" in December 2017. Set in 1950s London, Day-Lewis played obsessive dressmaker Reynolds Woodcock, who falls in love with a waitress, played by Vicky Krieps. Prior to the film's release, on 20 June 2017, Day-Lewis' spokeswoman, Leslee Dart, announced that he was retiring from acting. Unable to give an exact reason for his decision, in a November 2017 interview Day-Lewis stated, "I haven't figured it out. But it's settled on me, and it’s just there…I dread to use the overused word 'artist,' but there's something of the responsibility of the artist that hung over me. I need to believe in the value of what I’m doing. The work can seem vital. Irresistible, even. And if an audience believes it, that should be good enough for me. But, lately, it isn't.” The film and his performance was met with universal praise from critics.

Day-Lewis rarely discusses his personal life. Protective of his privacy, he described his life as a "lifelong study in evasion". He had a relationship with French actress Isabelle Adjani that lasted six years, eventually ending after a split and reconciliation. Their son Gabriel-Kane Day-Lewis was born in 1995 in New York City, a few months after the relationship ended.

In 1996, while working on the film version of the stage play "The Crucible", he visited the home of playwright Arthur Miller, where he was introduced to the writer's daughter, Rebecca Miller. They married later that year on 13 November 1996. The couple have two sons, Ronan Cal Day-Lewis (born 1998) and Cashel Blake Day-Lewis (born 2002). They divide their time between their homes in New York City and Annamoe, County Wicklow.

Day-Lewis has held dual British and Irish citizenship since 1993. He has maintained his Annamoe home since 1997. He stated "I do have dual citizenship, but I think of England as my country. I miss London very much but I couldn't live there because there came a time when I needed to be private and was forced to be public by the press. I couldn't deal with it". He is a supporter of South-East London football club Millwall.

On 15 July 2010, Day-Lewis received an honorary doctorate in letters from the University of Bristol, in part because of his attendance of the Bristol Old Vic Theatre School in his youth. Day-Lewis has stated that he had "no real religious education" and that he "suppose[s]" he is "a die-hard agnostic". In October 2012, he donated to the University of Oxford papers belonging to his father, the poet Cecil Day-Lewis, including early drafts of the poet's work and letters from actor John Gielgud and literary figures such as W. H. Auden, Robert Graves, and Philip Larkin. In July 2015, he became the Honorary President of the Poetry Archive. A registered UK charity, the Poetry Archive is a free website containing a growing collection of recordings of English-language poets reading their work. In June 2017, Day-Lewis became a patron of the Wilfred Owen Association. Sir Daniel's association with Wilfred Owen began with his father, Cecil Day-Lewis, who edited Owen's poetry in the 1960s and his mother, Jill Balcon, who was a vice-president of the Wilfred Owen Association until her death in 2009.

In 2008, when he received the Academy Award for Best Actor from Helen Mirren (who was on presenting duty having won the previous year's Best Actress Oscar for playing Queen Elizabeth II in "The Queen"), Day-Lewis knelt before her and she tapped him on each shoulder with the Oscar statuette, to which he quipped; "That's the closest I'll come to ever getting a knighthood". Day-Lewis was appointed a Knight Bachelor in the 2014 Birthday Honours for services to drama. On 14 November 2014, he was knighted by Prince William, Duke of Cambridge, in an investiture ceremony at Buckingham Palace.




</doc>
<doc id="159625" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=159625" title="Richard Dreyfuss">
Richard Dreyfuss

Richard Stephen Dreyfuss (; originally Dreyfus; born October 29, 1947) is an American actor best known for starring in popular films during the 1970s through 1990s, including "American Graffiti", "Jaws", "Stand By Me", "Close Encounters of the Third Kind", "Down and Out in Beverly Hills", "The Goodbye Girl", "Always, "and "Mr. Holland's Opus".

Dreyfuss won the Academy Award for Best Actor in 1977 for "The Goodbye Girl", and was nominated in 1995 for "Mr. Holland's Opus". He has also won a Golden Globe Award, a BAFTA Award, and was nominated in 2002 for Screen Actors Guild Awards in the Outstanding Performance by a Male Actor in a Drama Series and Outstanding Performance by a Male Actor in a Television Movie or Miniseries categories.

Dreyfuss was born in Brooklyn, New York, the son of Geraldine Dreyfus ("née" Robbins; 1921–2000), a peace activist, and Norman Dreyfus (1920–2013), an attorney and restaurateur, and was raised in the Bayside area of Queens, New York. His family is Jewish. He has commented that he "grew up thinking that Alfred Dreyfus and [he] are from the same family." His father disliked New York, and moved the family first to Europe, and later to Los Angeles, California, when Dreyfuss was nine. Dreyfuss attended Beverly Hills High School.

Dreyfuss began acting in his youth, at Temple Emanuel of Beverly Hills Arts Center and Westside Jewish Community Center, under drama teacher Bill Miller. He debuted in the TV production "In Mama's House", when he was fifteen. He attended San Fernando Valley State College, now California State University, Northridge, for a year, and was a conscientious objector during the Vietnam War, working in alternate service for two years, as a clerk in a Los Angeles hospital. During this time, he acted in a few small TV roles on shows such as "Peyton Place", "Gidget", "That Girl", "Gunsmoke", "Bewitched", "The Ghost & Mrs. Muir", and "The Big Valley". During the late 1960s and early 1970s, he also performed on stage on Broadway, Off-Broadway, repertory, and improvisational theater.

Dreyfuss appeared in the play "The Time of Your Life", which was revived on March 17, 1972 at the Huntington Hartford Theater in Los Angeles, and directed by Edwin Sherin.

Dreyfuss's first film role was a small, uncredited appearance in "The Graduate". He had one line, "Shall I get the cops? I'll get the cops". He was also briefly seen as a stage hand in "Valley of the Dolls" (1967), in which he had a few lines. In 1973 he starred in the CBS pilot "Catch-22". He appeared in the subsequent "Dillinger", and landed a role in the 1973 hit "American Graffiti", acting with other future stars such as Harrison Ford and Ron Howard. Dreyfuss played his first lead role in the Canadian film "The Apprenticeship of Duddy Kravitz" (1974), receiving positive reviews, including praise from Pauline Kael.

Dreyfuss went on to star in the box office blockbusters "Jaws" (1975) and "Close Encounters of the Third Kind" (1977), both directed by Steven Spielberg. He won the 1978 Academy Award for Best Actor at the 50th Academy Awards ceremony for his portrayal of a struggling actor in "The Goodbye Girl" (1977), becoming the youngest actor to do so (at the age of 30 years, 125 days old), besting Marlon Brando, who had won his first Oscar in 1955 at the age of 30 years 360 days old. This record stood for 25 years until it was broken in 2003 by Adrien Brody, who was three weeks shy of age 30 at the time of the 75th Academy Awards ceremony.

Around 1978, Dreyfuss began using cocaine frequently; his addiction came to a head four years later in 1982, when he was arrested for possession of the drug after he blacked out while driving, and his Mercedes-Benz 450 SL struck a tree. He entered rehabilitation and eventually made a Hollywood comeback with the films "Down And Out In Beverly Hills" in 1986 and "Stakeout" the following year. Dreyfuss also starred in the Rob Reiner movie "Stand by Me", a 1986 coming-of-age drama/comedy film adapted from Stephen King's novella "The Body". Dreyfuss plays the elder Gordie Lachance, who narrates the film. In 1988, he reunited with director Paul Mazursky to star in the political farce "Moon Over Parador".
In 1989, Dreyfuss reunited with Spielberg on "Always", a remake of "A Guy Named Joe" in which he co-starred with Holly Hunter. He had a starring role opposite Bill Murray in the 1991 comedy "What About Bob?", as a psychiatrist who goes crazy while trying to cope with a particularly obsessive new patient. That same year, Dreyfuss produced and starred as Georges Picquart in "Prisoner of Honor", an HBO movie about the historical Dreyfus Affair.

In 1994, he participated in the historic "Papal Concert to Commemorate the Shoah" at the Vatican in the presence of Pope John Paul II, Rav Elio Toaff, chief rabbi of Rome, and Oscar Luigi Scalfaro, President of the Italian Republic. He recited Kaddish as part of a performance of Leonard Bernstein's Third Symphony with the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra under the baton of Gilbert Levine. The event was broadcast worldwide.

Dreyfuss was nominated for an Oscar and a Golden Globe for his performance as Glenn Holland in "Mr. Holland's Opus" (1995). Since then, he has continued working in the movies, television and the stage. In 2001/2002, he played Max Bickford in the television drama "The Education of Max Bickford". In April 2004, he appeared in the revival of "Sly Fox" on Broadway (opposite Eric Stoltz, René Auberjonois, Bronson Pinchot and Elizabeth Berkley).

Dreyfuss recorded the voiceover for the Apple Computer "Think Different" ad campaign in 1997.
In November 2004, he was scheduled to appear in "The Producers" in London, but withdrew from the production a week before opening night. The media noted that Dreyfuss was still suffering from problems relating to an operation for a herniated disc in January, and that the part of Max Bialystock in the play is a physically demanding one. Both he and his assistant for the production stated that Dreyfuss was accumulating injuries that required him to wear physical therapy supports during rehearsals. Dreyfuss was eventually fired from the production, though he would return in 2008.

In 2006, he appeared as one of the survivors in the film "Poseidon". Dreyfuss portrayed U.S Vice President Dick Cheney in Oliver Stone's 2008 George W. Bush bio-pic "W".

In early 2009, he appeared in the play "Complicit" (directed by Kevin Spacey) in London's Old Vic theatre. His participation in the play was subject to much controversy, owing to his use of an earpiece on stage, reportedly because of his inability to learn his lines in time. He guest-voiced as himself in the "Three Kings" episode of "Family Guy" in 2009, and later appeared again in the episode "Peter-assment". Dreyfuss has guest starred in the sixth season of "Weeds" as Warren Schiff, Nancy's high school teacher to whom she had lost her virginity.

Dreyfuss has a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame at 7021 Hollywood Blvd.

Dreyfuss was among 99 other stars at the 2012 Academy Awards - Night of 100 Stars. He did an interview for the "Bill Zucker Show" with actor/singer Bill Zucker.

In 2014 he appeared with best-selling Lincoln scholar Ronald C. White in a documentary entitled "Lincoln's Greatest Speech", highlighting Lincoln's Second Inaugural Address, appearing as host of the program and reciting Lincoln's speech on camera.

On February 18, 2015, it was announced that Dreyfuss would portray Bernie Madoff in an upcoming miniseries. The first episode was telecast on February 3, 2016, co-starring Blythe Danner.

Dreyfuss seeks to revive Civics education to teach future generations about the power of their citizenship and the principles that hold America together. In 2006, he created The Dreyfuss Civics Initiative (TDCI). TDCI's mission is to revitalize and enhance the teaching of Civics in American public education to empower future generations with the critical thinking skills needed to fulfill the vast potential of American citizenship. TDCI is a 501(c)3 designated organization, recognized as of 2008.

Dreyfuss has made numerous public appearances since the organization's founding to raise awareness to start discussion and dialogue regarding the need for increased civic education. On February 16, 2006, he spoke at The National Press Club in Washington, D.C., in hopes of prompting a national discussion on impeachment charges against U.S. President George W. Bush. On November 17, 2006, Dreyfuss appeared on HBO's "Real Time with Bill Maher" as a panel member to discuss teaching Civics in schools. He formerly served on the Board of Trustees of the National Constitution Center in Philadelphia. In 2007, Dreyfuss appeared in the youth voting documentary film "18 in '08". In 2014, Dreyfuss appeared on "Huckabee", hosted by former Arkansas Governor Mike Huckabee, to discuss how civic education can create a stronger America and to ask viewers to sign the Preamble to support the cause.

Dreyfuss was also an advisor to The Mr. Holland's Opus Foundation.

Dreyfuss has been outspoken on the issue of how the media influences the shaping of public opinion, policy, and legislation. In the 2000s, he expressed his sentiments in favor of right to privacy, freedom of speech, democracy, and individual accountability.

In 1995, Dreyfuss co-authored with science-fiction writer Harry Turtledove the novel "The Two Georges", a steampunk/alternate history/mystery piece set in the year 1995 of a timeline where the American Revolution was peacefully avoided. Thomas Gainsborough's painting of George Washington and King George III, which symbolizes English-speaking North Americans' loyalty to the British Empire, is stolen by anti-Imperial terrorists, and officers of the Royal American Mounted Police must find it before it is destroyed.

In 2017, writer Jessica Teich accused Dreyfuss of exposing himself to her and attempting to get her to perform fellatio on him during the filming of the 1980s ABC comedy special "Funny, You Don't Look 200: A Constitutional Vaudeville"; in an interview with vulture.com, she said "I remember my face being brought close to his penis. I can’t remember how my face got close to his penis, but I do remember that the idea was that I was going to give him a blow job. I didn’t, and I left". Dreyfuss responded with a written statement denying that he had ever exposed himself to Teich. He did, however, state that he had been overly flirtatious in his past, and that he regretted that behavior, but he emphasized that he "value[s] and respect[s] women" and is "not an assaulter."

Dreyfuss has gotten into feuds with actors he has worked with, notably Robert Shaw ("Jaws") and Bill Murray ("What About Bob?"). He also did not get along with director Oliver Stone during the filming of "W." and referred to him as a fascist.

Dreyfuss married writer and producer Jeramie Rain in the early 1980s. With her, he had three children: Emily (born 1983), Benjamin (born 1986), and Harry (born 1990). His elder son, Benjamin, was born with Peters Anomaly, a rare genetic eye disorder which, after many operations, left him blind in his left eye. Dreyfuss and Rain have continued to raise money for ophthalmology centers throughout the United States. After his 1995 divorce from Rain, Dreyfuss married Janelle Lacey in 1999, but they divorced in 2005.

In 2006, Dreyfuss discussed his diagnosis of bipolar disorder in the documentary "", in which Fry (who also has the disorder) interviewed Dreyfuss about his experience with the disorder.

Dreyfuss has said he is agnostic.

Dreyfuss and Russian-born Svetlana Erokhin married in 2006 and lived in San Diego, California, although they frequently visited New York City and London, where Dreyfuss once lived. They also lived in Carlsbad, California. In February 2008, they bought a $1.5 million house in Encinitas, California, and plan to renovate the 1970s structure with state-of-the-art green technologies.

On June 10, 2011, Dreyfuss was made a Master Mason "at sight" by the Grand Master of Masons of the District of Columbia at the Washington DC Scottish Rite building, as well as a 32nd Degree Scottish Rite Mason. That evening he spoke at a banquet celebrating the 200th Anniversary of the Grand Lodge of the District of Columbia, about the Dreyfuss Initiative, a Research Society promoting civics and enlightenment values to be headquartered in Charleston, West Virginia.



</doc>
<doc id="171515" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=171515" title="Geoffrey Rush">
Geoffrey Rush

Geoffrey Roy Rush (born 6 July 1951) is an Australian actor. Rush is amongst 23 people who have won the "Triple Crown of Acting": an Academy Award, a Primetime Emmy Award, and a Tony Award. He has won one Academy Award for acting (of four nominations), three British Academy Film Awards (of five nominations), two Golden Globe Awards, and four Screen Actors Guild Awards. Rush is the founding President of the Australian Academy of Cinema and Television Arts and was named the 2012 Australian of the Year. He is also the first actor to win the Academy Award, BAFTA Award, Critics' Choice Movie Award, Golden Globe Award, and Screen Actors Guild Award for a single performance in film for his performance in "Shine" (1996).

Rush was born in Toowoomba, Queensland, the son of Merle (Bischof), a department store sales assistant, and Roy Baden Rush, an accountant for the Royal Australian Air Force. His father was of English, Irish, and Scottish ancestry, and his mother was of German descent. His parents divorced when he was five, and his mother subsequently took him to live with her parents in suburban Brisbane. Before he began his acting career, Rush attended Everton Park State High School, and graduated from the University of Queensland with a bachelor's degree in Arts. While at university, he was talent-spotted by Queensland Theatre Company (QTC) in Brisbane. Rush began his career with QTC in 1971, appearing in 17 productions.

In 1975, Rush went to Paris for two years and studied mime, movement and theatre at L'École Internationale de Théâtre Jacques Lecoq, before returning to resume his stage career with QTC. In 1979, he shared an apartment with actor Mel Gibson for four months while they co-starred in a stage production of "Waiting for Godot".

Rush made his theatre debut in the QTC's production of "Wrong Side of the Moon". He worked with the QTC for four years, appearing in roles ranging across classical plays and pantomime, from "Juno and the Paycock" to "Hamlet on Ice". Following these, Rush left for Paris where he studied further.

Rush's acting credits include Shakespeare's plays, "The Winter's Tale" (with the State Theatre Company of South Australia in 1987 at The Playhouse in Adelaide) and "Troilus and Cressida" (at the Old Museum Building in 1989). He also appeared in an ongoing production of Oscar Wilde's "The Importance of Being Earnest" as John Worthing (Ernest) (in which his wife, Jane Menelaus, appeared as Gwendolen).

In 1994, Rush played Horatio in a critically production of Hamlet alongside Richard Roxburgh, Jacqueline McKenzie and David Wenham in the Company B production at the Belvoir St Theatre in Sydney.

In September 1998, Rush played the title role in the Beaumarchais play "The Marriage of Figaro" for the QTC. This was the opening production of the Optus Playhouse at the Queensland Performing Arts Centre at South Bank in Brisbane. A pun on Rush's name (and the circumstances) was used in the opening prologue of the play with the comment that the "Optus Playhouse was opening with a Rush".

Rush has appeared on stage for the Brisbane Arts Theatre and in many other theatre venues. He has also worked as a theatre director. In 2007, he starred as King Berenger in a production of Eugène Ionesco's "Exit the King" at the Malthouse Theatre in Melbourne and Company B in Sydney, directed by Neil Armfield. For this performance, he received a Helpmann Award nomination for best male actor in a play.

Rush made his Broadway debut in a re-staging of "Exit the King" under Malthouse Theatre's touring moniker Malthouse Melbourne and Company B Belvoir. This re-staging featured a new American cast including Susan Sarandon. The show opened on 26 March 2009 at the Ethel Barrymore Theatre. Rush won the Outer Critics Circle Award, Theatre World Award, Drama Desk Award, the Distinguished Performance Award from the Drama League Award and the 2009 Tony Award for Best Performance by a Leading Actor in a Play.

In 2010, Rush played Man in Chair in "The Drowsy Chaperone" on its Australian tour.

In 2011, Rush played the lead in a theatrical adaptation of Nikolai Gogol's short story "The Diary of a Madman" at the Brooklyn Academy of Music. Rush won for this role Helpmann Award and was nominated for the Drama Desk Award.

From November 2011, Rush played the role of Lady Bracknell in the Melbourne Theatre Company production of "The Importance of Being Earnest". Other actors from the 1988 production include Jane Menelaus, this time as Miss Prism, and Bob Hornery, who had played Canon Chasuble, as the two butlers.

Rush made his film debut in the Australian film "Hoodwink" in 1981. His next film was Gillian Armstrong's "Starstruck", the following year. In the coming years he appeared in small roles on television dramas, including a role as a dentist in a 1993 episode of the British television series "Lovejoy". He made his breakthrough performance in 1996 with "Shine", for which he won the Academy Award for Best Actor. That same year, James L. Brooks flew him to Los Angeles to audition for the part of Simon Bishop in "As Good as It Gets", and offered him the role, but Rush declined it (it went to Greg Kinnear).

In 1998, he appeared in three major films: "Les Misérables", "Elizabeth", and "Shakespeare in Love" for which he received his second Academy Award nomination as Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor.

In 1999, Rush took the lead role as Steven Price in the horror film "House on Haunted Hill". In 2000, he received his third Academy Award nomination, for "Quills", in which he played the Marquis de Sade and he voiced the role of Bunyip Bluegum in "The Magic Pudding".

Rush's career continued at a fast pace, with nine films released from 2001 to 2003. He starred in the film "", as Captain Hector Barbossa, also appearing in its sequels, "", "", "", and "".

Rush reprised his character's voice for the enhancements at the "Pirates of the Caribbean" attractions at the Disneyland and "Magic Kingdom" theme parks, which involved an Audio-Animatronic with Rush's likeness being installed (including one at Tokyo Disneyland). He also voiced Nigel the pelican in "Finding Nemo".

Rush played actor Peter Sellers in the television film "The Life and Death of Peter Sellers". For this performance, he won the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Miniseries or Movie, Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Miniseries or Television Film, and Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Male Actor in a Miniseries or Television Movie. In 2005, he starred in Steven Spielberg's "Munich" as Ephraim, a Mossad agent.

In 2006, Rush hosted the Australian Film Institute Awards for the Nine Network. He was the Master of ceremonies again at the 2007 AFI Awards.

In the beginning of 2009, Rush appeared in a series of special edition postage stamps featuring some of Australia's internationally recognised actors. He, Cate Blanchett, Russell Crowe, and Nicole Kidman each appear twice in the series. Rush's image is taken from "Shine".

In 2010, Rush played speech therapist Lionel Logue in "The King's Speech", a part that earned him a BAFTA and nominations for the Academy Awards and Golden Globe Awards for Best Supporting Actor.

Rush returned as Captain Hector Barbossa in "", starring Johnny Depp, in 2011. Rush is also preparing for a film version of "The Drowsy Chaperone", an award-winning stage musical. In addition, he voiced the alien Tomar-Re in the film adaptation of the "Green Lantern" comic book series.

In 2011, Rush made a cameo in a commercial, "The Potato Peeler", for the Melbourne International Film Festival (MIFF), playing a Polish farmer. He spoke his lines in Polish for the part.

In August 2011 he was appointed the foundation President of the newly formed Australian Academy of Cinema and Television Arts. He resigned from the post in December 2017 after Sydney Theatre Company announced they had received an accusation of inappropriate behaviour against him.

In 2013, Rush starred alongside Jim Sturgess in "The Best Offer" and the film version of the best-selling novel "The Book Thief".

Since 1988, Rush has been married to actress Jane Menelaus, with whom he has a daughter, Angelica (born 1992), and a son, James (born 1995). Rush lives in Melbourne, in the suburb of Camberwell.




</doc>
<doc id="16273" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16273" title="James Stewart">
James Stewart

James Maitland Stewart (May 20, 1908July 2, 1997) was an American actor and military officer who is among the most honored and popular stars in film history. A major Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer contract player, Stewart was known for his distinctive drawl and down-to-earth persona, which helped him often portray American middle-class men struggling in crisis. Many of the films he starred in have become enduring classics.

Stewart was nominated for five Academy Awards, winning one in competition for "The Philadelphia Story" (1940), and received an Academy Lifetime Achievement award in 1985. In 1999, Stewart was named the third-greatest male screen legend of the Golden Age of Hollywood by the American Film Institute, behind Humphrey Bogart and Cary Grant. The American Film Institute has also named five of Stewart's films to its list of the 100 best American films ever made.

He also had a noted military career and was a World War II and Vietnam War veteran and pilot, who rose to the rank of Brigadier General in the United States Air Force Reserve, becoming the highest-ranking actor in military history.

James Maitland Stewart was born on May 20, 1908, in Indiana, Pennsylvania, the son of Elizabeth Ruth ("née" Jackson; March 16, 1875August 2, 1953) and Alexander Maitland Stewart (May 19, 1871 – December 28, 1961), who owned a hardware store. Stewart was mainly of Scottish ancestry and was raised as a Presbyterian. He was descended from veterans of the American Revolution, the War of 1812, and the American Civil War. The eldest of three children (he had two younger sisters, Virginia Wilson Stewart and Mary Kelly Stewart), young Jimmy was expected to one day inherit his father's store and continue a business that had been in the family for three generations. His mother was an excellent pianist, but his father discouraged Stewart's request for music lessons. When his father once accepted a gift of an accordion from a guest, Stewart quickly learned to play the instrument, which became a fixture offstage during his acting career. As the family grew, music continued to be an important part of family life.

Stewart attended Mercersburg Academy prep school, graduating in 1928. He was active in a variety of activities. He played on the football and track teams, was art editor of the "KARUX" yearbook, and a member of the choir club, glee club, and John Marshall Literary Society. During his first summer break, Stewart returned to his hometown to work as a brick loader for a local construction company and on highway and road construction jobs where he painted lines on the roads. Over the following two summers, he took a job as an assistant with a professional magician. He made his first appearance onstage at Mercersburg, as Buquet in the play "The Wolves".

A shy child, Stewart spent much of his after-school time in the basement working on model airplanes, mechanical drawing, and chemistry—all with a dream of going into aviation. It was a dream greatly enhanced by the legendary 1927 flight of Charles Lindbergh, whose progress 19-year-old Stewart, then stricken with scarlet fever, was himself avidly following from home; thus foreshadowing his starring movie role as Lindbergh 30 years later.

However, he abandoned visions of being a pilot when his father insisted that instead of the United States Naval Academy he attend Princeton University. Stewart enrolled at Princeton in 1928 as a member of the class of 1932. He excelled at studying architecture, so impressing his professors with his thesis on an airport design that he was awarded a scholarship for graduate studies, but he gradually became attracted to the school's drama and music clubs, including the Princeton Triangle Club. His acting and accordion talents at Princeton led him to be invited to the University Players, an intercollegiate summer stock company in West Falmouth, Massachusetts, on Cape Cod. The company had been organized in 1928 and would run until 1932, with Joshua Logan, Bretaigne Windust and Charles Leatherbee as directors. Stewart performed in bit parts in the Players' productions in Cape Cod during the summer of 1932, after he graduated.

The troupe had previously included Henry Fonda and Margaret Sullavan. Stewart and Fonda became close friends over the summer of 1932 when they shared an apartment with Joshua Logan and Myron McCormick. When Stewart came to New York at the end of the summer stock season, which had included the Broadway tryout of "Goodbye Again", he shared an apartment with Fonda, who had by then finalized his divorce from Sullavan. Along with fellow University Players Alfred Dalrymple and Myron McCormick, Stewart debuted on Broadway in the brief run of "Carry Nation" and a few weeks later – again with McCormick and Dalrymple – as a chauffeur in the comedy "Goodbye Again", in which he had two lines. "The New Yorker" commented, "Mr. James Stewart's chauffeur... comes on for three minutes and walks off to a round of spontaneous applause."

Upon Stewart's arrival by train in Los Angeles, Fonda greeted him at the station and took him to Fonda's studio-supplied lodging, next door to Greta Garbo. Stewart's first job at the studio was as a participant in screen tests with newly arrived starlets. At first, he had trouble being cast in Hollywood films owing to his gangling looks and shy, humble screen presence. Aside from an unbilled appearance in a Shemp Howard comedy short called "Art Trouble" in 1934, his first film was the poorly received Spencer Tracy vehicle "The Murder Man" (1935). "Rose Marie" (1936), an adaptation of a popular operetta, was more successful. After having mixed success in films, he received his first intensely dramatic role in 1936's "After the Thin Man", and played Jean Harlow's character's frustrated boyfriend in the Clark Gable vehicle "Wife vs. Secretary" earlier that same year.

On the romantic front, he dated newly divorced Ginger Rogers. The romance soon cooled, however, and by chance Stewart encountered Margaret Sullavan again. Stewart found his footing in Hollywood thanks largely to Sullavan, who campaigned for Stewart to be her leading man in the 1936 romantic comedy "Next Time We Love". She rehearsed extensively with him, having a noticeable effect on his confidence. She encouraged Stewart to feel comfortable with his unique mannerisms and boyish charm and use them naturally as his own style. Stewart was enjoying Hollywood life and had no regrets about giving up the stage, as he worked six days a week in the MGM factory. In 1936, he acquired big-time agent Leland Hayward, who would eventually marry Sullavan. Hayward started to chart Stewart's career, deciding that the best path for him was through loan-outs to other studios.

In 1938 Stewart had a brief, tumultuous romance with Hollywood queen Norma Shearer, whose husband, Irving Thalberg, head of production at MGM, had died two years earlier. Stewart began a successful partnership with director Frank Capra in 1938, when he was loaned out to Columbia Pictures to star in "You Can't Take It With You". Capra had been impressed by Stewart's minor role in "Navy Blue and Gold" (1937). The director had recently completed several well received films, including "It Happened One Night" (1934), and was looking for the right actor to suit his needs—other recent actors in Capra's films such as Clark Gable, Ronald Colman, and Gary Cooper did not quite fit. Not only was Stewart just what he was looking for, but Capra also found Stewart understood that prototype intuitively and required very little directing. Later Capra commented, "I think he's probably the best actor who's ever hit the screen."

"You Can't Take It With You", starring Capra's "favorite actress", comedian Jean Arthur, won the 1938 Best Picture Academy Award. The following year saw Stewart work with Capra and Arthur again in the political comedy-drama "Mr. Smith Goes to Washington". Stewart replaced intended star Gary Cooper in the film, playing an idealist thrown into the political arena. Upon its October 1939 release, the film garnered critical praise and became a box-office success. Stewart received the first of five Academy Award nominations for Best Actor. Stewart's father was still trying to talk him into leaving Hollywood and its sinful ways and to return to his home town to lead a decent life. Stewart took a secret trip to Europe to take a break and returned home in 1939 just as Germany invaded Poland.
"Destry Rides Again", also released in 1939, became Stewart's first western film, a genre with which he would become identified later in his career. In this western parody, he is a pacifist lawman and Marlene Dietrich is the dancing saloon girl who comes to love him, but does not get him. Off-screen, Dietrich did get her man, but the romance was short-lived. "Made for Each Other" (1939) had Stewart sharing the screen with Carole Lombard in a melodrama that garnered good reviews for both stars, but did less well with the public. "Newsweek" wrote that they were "perfectly cast in the leading roles". Between movies, Stewart began a radio career and became a distinctive voice on the Lux Radio Theater's "The Screen Guild Theater" and other shows. So well-known had his slow drawl become that comedians began impersonating him.

In 1940 Stewart and Sullavan reunited for two films. The first, the Ernst Lubitsch romantic comedy, "The Shop Around the Corner", starred them as co-workers unknowingly involved in a pen-pal romance but who cannot stand each other in real life. It was Stewart's fifth film of the year and one of the rare ones shot in sequence; it was completed in only 27 days. "The Mortal Storm", directed by Frank Borzage, was one of the first blatantly anti-Nazi films to be produced in Hollywood and featured Sullavan and Stewart as friends and then lovers caught in turmoil upon Hitler's rise to power, literally hunted down by their own friends.
Stewart also starred with Cary Grant and Katharine Hepburn in George Cukor's classic "The Philadelphia Story" (1940). His performance as an intrusive, fast-talking reporter earned him his only Academy Award in a competitive category (Best Actor, 1941); he beat out his good friend Henry Fonda ("The Grapes of Wrath"). Stewart thought his performance "entertaining and slick and smooth" but lacking the "guts" of "Mr. Smith". Stewart gave the Oscar statuette to his father, who displayed it for many years in a case inside the front door of his hardware store, alongside other family awards and military medals.

During the months before he began military service, Stewart appeared in a series of screwball comedies with varying levels of success. He followed "No Time for Comedy" (1940) with Rosalind Russell and "Come Live with Me" (1941) with Hedy Lamarr with the Judy Garland musical "Ziegfeld Girl" and the George Marshall romantic comedy "Pot o' Gold", featuring Paulette Goddard. Stewart was drafted in late 1940, a situation that coincided with the lapse in his MGM contract, marking a turning point in Stewart's career, with 28 movies to his credit at that point.

Stewart's family on both sides had deep military roots, as both grandfathers had fought in the Civil War, and his father had served during both the Spanish–American War and World War I. Stewart considered his father to be the biggest influence on his life, so it was not surprising that, when another war came, he too was willing to serve. Members of his family had previously been in the infantry, but Stewart chose to become a flier.

An early interest in flying led Stewart to gain his private pilot certificate in 1935 and commercial pilot license in 1938. He often flew cross-country to visit his parents in Pennsylvania, navigating by the railroad tracks. Nearly two years before the December 1941 attack on Pearl Harbor, Stewart had accumulated over 400 hours of flying time.

Considered a highly proficient pilot, he entered a cross-country race as a co-pilot in 1939. Stewart, along with musician/composer Hoagy Carmichael, saw the need for trained war pilots, and joined with other Hollywood celebrities to invest in Thunderbird Field, a pilot-training school built and operated by Southwest Airways in Glendale, Arizona. This airfield became part of the United States Army Air Forces training establishment and trained more than 10,000 pilots during World War II.

In October 1940, Stewart was drafted into the United States Army but was rejected for failing to meet the weight requirements for his height for new recruits—Stewart was under the standard. To get up to , he sought out the help of Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer's muscle man and trainer Don Loomis, who was noted for his ability to help people gain or lose weight in his studio gymnasium. Stewart subsequently attempted to enlist in the Air Corps, but still came in underweight, although he persuaded the enlistment officer to run new tests, this time passing the weigh-in, with the result that Stewart enlisted and was inducted in the Army on March 22, 1941. He became the first major American movie star to wear a military uniform in World War II.

Stewart enlisted as a private but applied for an Air Corps commission and Service Pilot rating as both a college graduate and a licensed commercial pilot. Soon to be 33, he was almost six years beyond the maximum age restriction for Aviation Cadet training, the normal path of commissioning for pilots, navigators and bombardiers. The now-obsolete auxiliary pilot ratings (Glider Pilot, Liaison Pilot and Service Pilot) differed from the Aviation Cadet Program in that a higher maximum age limit and corrected vision were allowed upon initial entry. Stewart received his commission as a second lieutenant on January 1, 1942, shortly after the attack on Pearl Harbor, while a corporal at Moffett Field, California. He received his Service Pilot rating at that time, under the Service Pilot program established in March 1942 for experienced former civilian pilots. Although Service Pilots were normally restricted to noncombat flying, they were permitted to fly overseas on cargo and utility transports, typically with Air Transport, Ferry or Troop Carrier Commands. Under the regulations of the period, a Service Pilot could obtain an unrestricted Pilot rating after one year of USAAF service on flying status, provided he met certain flight experience requirements and passed an evaluation board, and some did in fact go on to combat flying assignments. Stewart's first assignment was an appearance at a March of Dimes rally in Washington, D.C., but Stewart wanted assignment to an operational unit rather than serving as a recruiting symbol. He applied for and was granted advanced training on multi-engine aircraft. Stewart was posted to nearby Mather Field to instruct in both single- and twin-engine aircraft.
Public appearances by Stewart were limited engagements scheduled by the Army Air Forces. "Stewart appeared several times on network radio with Edgar Bergen and Charlie McCarthy. Shortly after Pearl Harbor, he performed with Orson Welles, Edward G. Robinson, Walter Huston and Lionel Barrymore in an all-network radio program called "We Hold These Truths", dedicated to the 150th anniversary of the Bill of Rights." In early 1942, Stewart was asked to appear in a film to help recruit the 100,000 airmen the USAAF anticipated it would need to win the war. The USAAF's First Motion Picture Unit shot scenes of Lieutenant Stewart in his pilot's flight jacket and recorded his voice for narration. The short recruitment film "Winning Your Wings" appeared in movie theaters nationwide beginning in late May and was very successful, resulting in 150,000 new recruits.

Stewart was concerned that his expertise and celebrity status would relegate him to instructor duties "behind the lines". His fears were confirmed when, after his promotion to first lieutenant on July 7, 1942, he was stationed from August to December 1942 at Kirtland Army Airfield in Albuquerque, New Mexico, piloting AT-11 Kansans used in training bombardiers. He was transferred to Hobbs Army Airfield, New Mexico, for three months of transition training in the four-engine B-17 Flying Fortress, then sent to the Combat Crew Processing Center in Salt Lake City, where he expected to be assigned to a combat unit. Instead, he was assigned in early 1943 to an operational training unit, the 29th Bombardment Group at Gowen Field, Boise, Idaho, as an instructor. He was promoted to captain on July 9, 1943, and appointed a squadron commander. To Stewart, now 35, combat duty seemed far away and unreachable, and he had no clear plans for the future. However, a rumor that Stewart would be taken off flying status and assigned to making training films or selling bonds called for immediate action, because what he dreaded most was "the hope-shattering spectre of a dead end". Stewart appealed to his commander, 30-year-old Lt. Col. Walter E. Arnold Jr., who understood his situation and recommended Stewart to the commander of the 445th Bombardment Group, a B-24 Liberator unit that had just completed initial training at Gowen Field and gone on to final training at Sioux City Army Air Base, Iowa.
In August 1943, Stewart was assigned to the 445th Bomb Group as operations officer of the 703d Bombardment Squadron, but after three weeks became its commander. On October 12, 1943, judged ready to go overseas, the 445th Bomb Group staged to Lincoln Army Airfield, Nebraska. Flying individually, the aircraft first flew to Morrison Army Airfield, Florida, and then on the circuitous Southern Route along the coasts of South America and Africa to RAF Tibenham, Norfolk, England. After several weeks of training missions, in which Stewart flew with most of his combat crews, the group flew its first combat mission on December 13, 1943, to bomb the U-boat facilities at Kiel, Germany, followed three days later by a mission to Bremen. Stewart led the high squadron of the group formation on the first mission, and the entire group on the second. Following a mission to Ludwigshafen, Germany, on January 7, 1944, Stewart was promoted to major. Stewart was awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross for actions as deputy commander of the 2nd Combat Bombardment Wing on the first day of "Big Week" operations in February and flew two other missions that week.

On March 22, 1944, Stewart flew his 12th combat mission, leading the 2nd Bomb Wing in an attack on Berlin. On March 30, 1944, he was sent to RAF Old Buckenham to become group operations officer of the 453rd Bombardment Group, a new B-24 unit that had just lost both its commander and operations officer on missions. To inspire the unit, Stewart flew as command pilot in the lead B-24 on several missions deep into Nazi-occupied Europe. As a staff officer, Stewart was assigned to the 453rd "for the duration" and thus not subject to a quota of missions of a combat tour. He nevertheless assigned himself as a combat crewman on the group's missions until his promotion to lieutenant colonel on June 3 and reassignment on July 1, 1944, to the 2nd Bomb Wing, assigned as executive officer to Brigadier General Edward J. Timberlake. His official tally of mission credits while assigned to the 445th and 453rd Bomb Groups was 20 sorties.

Stewart continued to go on missions uncredited, flying with the pathfinder squadron of the 389th Bombardment Group, with his two former groups and with groups of the 20th Combat Bomb Wing. He received a second award of the Distinguished Flying Cross for actions in combat and was awarded the French Croix de Guerre. He also was awarded the Air Medal with three oak leaf clusters.

Stewart served in a number of staff positions in the 2nd and 20th Bomb Wings between July 1944 and the end of the war in Europe, and was promoted to full colonel on March 29, 1945. Less than two months later, on May 10, he succeeded to command briefly the 2nd Bomb Wing, a position he held until June 15, 1945. Stewart was one of the few Americans to ever rise from private to colonel in only four years during the Second World War.

At the beginning of June 1945, Stewart was the presiding officer of the court-martial of a pilot and navigator who were charged with dereliction of duty for having accidentally bombed the Swiss city of Zurich the previous March—the first instance of U.S. personnel being tried for an attack on a neutral country. The court acquitted the defendants.

Stewart continued to play a role in the Army Air Forces Reserve following World War II and the new United States Air Force Reserve after the official establishment of the Air Force as an independent service in 1947.

Stewart received permanent promotion to colonel in 1953 and served as Air Force Reserve commander of Dobbins Air Force Base, Georgia, the present day Dobbins Air Reserve Base. He was also one of the 12 founders and a charter member of the Air Force Association in October 1945. Stewart rarely spoke about his wartime service, but did appear in January 1974 in an episode of the TV series "The World At War", "Whirlwind: Bombing Germany (September 1939 – April 1944)", commenting on the disastrous mission of October 14, 1943, against Schweinfurt, Germany. At his request, he was identified only as "James Stewart, Squadron Commander" in the documentary.

On July 23, 1959, Stewart was promoted to brigadier general. During his active duty periods, he remained current as a pilot of Convair B-36 Peacemaker, Boeing B-47 Stratojet and Boeing B-52 Stratofortress intercontinental bombers of the Strategic Air Command. On February 20, 1966, Brigadier General Stewart flew as a non-duty observer in a B-52 on an Arc Light bombing mission during the Vietnam War. He refused the release of any publicity regarding his participation, as he did not want it treated as a stunt, but as part of his job as an officer in the Air Force Reserve.

Stewart, however, often did his part in publicizing and promoting military service in general and the United States Air Force in particular. In 1963, for example, as part of the plot in an episode of the popular television sitcom "My Three Sons", Stewart appeared as himself in his brigadier-general's uniform to address high-school students about the importance of science in society and about the many accomplishments of the select group of so-called "eggheads" being educated at the United States Air Force Academy in Colorado Springs. Five years later, after 27 years of service, Stewart officially retired from the Air Force on May 31, 1968. Stewart received a number of awards during his military service and upon his retirement was also awarded the United States Air Force Distinguished Service Medal. On May 23, 1985, President Ronald Reagan awarded Stewart the Presidential Medal of Freedom, simultaneously advancing Stewart to the rank of Major General on the U.S. Air Force Retired list.

After the war, Stewart took time off to reassess his career. He was an early investor in Southwest Airways, founded by Leland Hayward, and considered going into the aviation industry if his restarted film career did not prosper. Upon Stewart's return to Hollywood in fall 1945, he decided not to renew his MGM contract. He signed with the MCA talent agency. His former agent Leland Hayward got out of the talent business in 1944 after selling his A-list of stars, including Stewart, to MCA.

For his first film in five years, Stewart appeared in his third and final Frank Capra production, "It's a Wonderful Life "(1946). The role was Stewart's first since returning from service in World War II, during which he experienced what is now recognized as post-traumatic stress disorder. Capra paid RKO for the rights to the story and formed his own production company, Liberty Films. The female lead went to Donna Reed when Capra's perennial first choice, Jean Arthur, was unavailable, and after Ginger Rogers, Olivia de Havilland, Ann Dvorak, and Martha Scott had all turned down the role. Stewart appeared as George Bailey, an upstanding small-town man who becomes increasingly frustrated by his ordinary existence and financial troubles. Driven to suicide on Christmas Eve, he is led to reassess his life by Clarence Odbody, an "angel, second class" played by Henry Travers.

Although "It's a Wonderful Life" was nominated for five Academy Awards, including Stewart's third Best Actor nomination, it received mixed reviews and only disappointingly moderate success at the box office. However, in the decades since the film's release, it grew to define Stewart's film persona and is widely considered as a sentimental Christmas film classic and, according to the American Film Institute, one of the 100 best American movies ever made. In an interview with Michael Parkinson in 1973, Stewart declared that out of all the movies he had made, "It's a Wonderful Life" was his favorite. After viewing the film, President Harry S. Truman concluded, "If Bess and I had a son we'd want him to be just like Jimmy Stewart." In the aftermath of the film, Capra's production company went into bankruptcy, while Stewart started to have doubts about his ability to act after his military hiatus. His father kept insisting he come home and marry a local girl. Meanwhile, in Hollywood, his generation of actors were fading and a new wave of actors would soon remake the town, including Marlon Brando, Montgomery Clift and James Dean.

"Magic Town" (1947), a comedy film directed by William A. Wellman, starring James Stewart and Jane Wyman, was one of the first films about the then-new science of public opinion polling. It was poorly received. He completed "Rope" (1948) directed by Alfred Hitchcock and "Call Northside 777" (1948), and weathered two box-office disappointments with "On Our Merry Way" (1948), a comedic musical ensemble in which Stewart and Henry Fonda were paired as two jazz musicians, and "You Gotta Stay Happy" (1949), for which the posters depicted Stewart being kissed on one cheek by Joan Fontaine and on the other by a chimpanzee. In the documentary film "James Stewart: A Wonderful Life" (1987), hosted by Johnny Carson, Stewart said that he went back to Westerns in 1950 in part because of the string of flops.

He returned to the stage to star in Mary Coyle Chase's "Harvey", which had opened to nearly universal praise in November 1944, as Elwood P. Dowd, a wealthy eccentric living with his sister and niece, and whose best friend is an invisible rabbit as large as a man. Dowd's eccentricity, especially the friendship with the rabbit, is ruining the niece's hopes of finding a husband. While trying to have Dowd committed to a sanatorium, his sister is committed herself while the play follows Dowd on an ordinary day in his not-so-ordinary life. Stewart took over the role from Frank Fay and gained an increased Broadway following in the unconventional play. The play, which ran for nearly three years with Stewart as its star, was successfully adapted into a 1950 film, directed by Henry Koster, with Stewart reprising his role and Josephine Hull portraying his sister. Bing Crosby was the first choice, but he declined. Stewart received his fourth Best Actor nomination for his performance. Stewart also played the role on Broadway in 1970, which was shot on videotape for NBC as part of the Hallmark Hall of Fame series in 1972, and on the London stage in 1975.

After "Harvey", the World War II film "Malaya" (1949) with Spencer Tracy, and the conventional but highly successful biographical film "The Stratton Story" in 1949, Stewart's first pairing with "on-screen wife" June Allyson, his career took another turn. During the 1950s, he expanded into the Western and suspense genres, thanks to collaborations with Alfred Hitchcock and Anthony Mann.

Other performances by Stewart during this time include the critically acclaimed 1950 Delmer Daves Western "Broken Arrow", which featured Stewart as an ex-soldier and Indian agent making peace with the Apache; a troubled clown in the 1952 Best Picture "The Greatest Show on Earth"; and Stewart's role as Charles Lindbergh in Billy Wilder's 1957 "The Spirit of St. Louis". He also starred in the Western radio show "The Six Shooter" for its one-season run from 1953 to 1954. During this time, Stewart wore the same cowboy hat and rode the same horse, "Pie", in most of his Westerns.

Cary Grant said of Stewart's acting technique:He had the ability to talk naturally. He knew that in conversations people "do" often interrupt one another and it's not always so easy to get a thought out. It took a little time for the sound men to get used to him, but he had an "enormous" impact. And then, some years later, Marlon came out and did the same thing all over again—but what people forget is that Jimmy did it first.

In Stewart's collaborations with director Anthony Mann, he entered the realm of the western. Stewart's first appearance in a film directed by Mann came with the 1950 western, "Winchester '73". In choosing Mann (after first choice Fritz Lang declined), Stewart cemented a powerful partnership. The film, which became a box-office hit upon its release, set the pattern for their future collaborations. In it, Stewart is a tough, revengeful sharpshooter, the winner of a prized rifle which is stolen and then passes through many hands, until the showdown between Stewart and his brother (Stephen McNally).

Other Stewart–Mann westerns, such as "Bend of the River" (1952), "The Naked Spur" (1953), "The Far Country" (1954) and "The Man from Laramie" (1955), were perennial favorites among young audiences entranced by the American West. Frequently, the films featured Stewart as a troubled cowboy seeking redemption, while facing corrupt cattlemen, ranchers and outlaws—a man who knows violence first hand and struggles to control it. The Stewart–Mann collaborations laid the foundation for many of the westerns of the 1950s and remain popular today for their grittier, more realistic depiction of the classic movie genre. Audiences saw Stewart's screen persona evolve into a more mature, more ambiguous, and edgier presence.

Stewart and Mann also collaborated on other films outside the western genre. "The Glenn Miller Story" (1954) was critically acclaimed, garnering Stewart a BAFTA Award nomination, and (together with "The Spirit of St. Louis") continued Stewart's portrayals of 'American heroes'. "Thunder Bay", released the same year, transplanted the plot arc of their western collaborations to a more contemporary setting, with Stewart as a Louisiana oil driller facing hostile fishermen. "Strategic Air Command", released in 1955, allowed Stewart to use his experiences in the United States Air Force on film.

Stewart's starring role in "Winchester '73" was also a turning point in Hollywood. Universal Studios, who wanted Stewart to appear in both that film and "Harvey," balked at his $200,000 asking price. His agent, Lew Wasserman, brokered an alternate deal, in which Stewart would appear in both films for no pay, in exchange for a percentage of the profits as well as cast and director approval. Stewart ended up earning about $600,000 for "Winchester '73" alone. Hollywood's other stars quickly capitalized on this new way of doing business, which further undermined the decaying "studio system".

The second collaboration to define Stewart's career in the 1950s was with director Alfred Hitchcock. Like Mann, Hitchcock uncovered new depths to Stewart's acting, showing a protagonist confronting his fears and his repressed desires. Stewart's first movie with Hitchcock was the technologically innovative 1948 film "Rope", shot in long "real time" takes.

The two collaborated for the second of four times on the 1954 hit "Rear Window", widely considered one of Hitchcock's masterpieces. Stewart portrays photographer L.B. "Jeff" Jeffries, loosely based on "Life" photographer Robert Capa, who projects his fantasies and fears onto the people he observes out his apartment window while on hiatus due to a broken leg. Jeffries gets into more than he can handle, however, when he believes he has witnessed a salesman (Raymond Burr) hiding evidence of a murder, and when his glamorous girlfriend (Grace Kelly), at first disdainful of his voyeurism and skeptical about any crime, eventually is drawn in and tries to help solve the mystery. Limited by his wheelchair, Stewart is led by Hitchcock to react to what his character sees with mostly facial responses. It was a landmark year for Stewart, becoming the highest grossing actor of 1954 and the most popular Hollywood star in the world, displacing John Wayne. Hitchcock and Stewart formed a corporation, Patron Inc., to produce the film, which later became the subject of a Supreme Court case "Stewart v. Abend" (1990).

After starring in Hitchcock's remake of the director's earlier production, "The Man Who Knew Too Much" (1956), with Doris Day, Stewart starred, with Kim Novak, in what many consider Hitchcock's most personal film, "Vertigo" (1958). The movie starred Stewart as John "Scottie" Ferguson, a former police investigator suffering from acrophobia, who develops an obsession with a woman he is shadowing. Scottie's obsession inevitably leads to the destruction of everything he once had and believed in. Though the film is widely considered a classic today, "Vertigo" met with very mixed reviews and poor box-office receipts upon its release, and marked the last collaboration between Stewart and Hitchcock. The director reportedly blamed the film's failure on Stewart looking too old to be Kim Novak's love interest, and cast Cary Grant as Roger Thornhill in "North by Northwest" (1959), a role Stewart had very much wanted. (Grant was actually four years older than Stewart but photographed much younger.) Critical appreciation of all three films continues to be strong. In 2012 "Vertigo" was ranked highest in the "Sight & Sound" critics poll for the greatest films ever made, taking the title from long-standing favorite "Citizen Kane".

In 1960, Stewart was awarded the New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Actor and received his fifth and final Academy Award for Best Actor nomination, for his role in the 1959 Otto Preminger film "Anatomy of a Murder". This courtroom drama stars Stewart as Paul Biegler, the lawyer of a hot-tempered soldier (played by Ben Gazzara) who claims temporary insanity after murdering a tavern owner who raped his wife. The film featured a career-making performance by George C. Scott as the prosecutor. The film was considered quite explicit for its time, and it was a box-office success. Stewart's nomination was one of seven for the film (Charlton Heston was the winner with "Ben-Hur"), and saw his transition into the final decades of his career.

On January 1, 1960, Stewart received news of the death of Margaret Sullavan. As a friend, mentor, and focus of his early romantic feelings, she had a unique influence on Stewart's life. On April 17, 1961, longtime friend Gary Cooper was too ill to attend the 33rd Academy Awards ceremony, so Stewart accepted the honorary Oscar on his behalf. Stewart's emotional speech hinted that something was seriously wrong, and the next day newspapers ran the headline, "Gary Cooper has cancer". One month later, on May 13, 1961, six days after his 60th birthday, Cooper died.

In the early 1960s, Stewart took leading roles in three John Ford films, his first work with the director. The first, "Two Rode Together", paired him with Richard Widmark in a Western with thematic echoes of Ford's "The Searchers". The next, 1962's "The Man Who Shot Liberty Valance", Stewart's first picture with John Wayne, is a classic "psychological" western, shot in black and white film noir style featuring powerful use of shadows in the climactic sequence, with Stewart as an Eastern attorney who goes against his non-violent principles when he is forced to confront a psychopathic outlaw (played by Lee Marvin) in a small frontier town. At story's end, Stewart's character — now a rising political figure — faces a difficult ethical choice as he attempts to reconcile his actions with his personal integrity. The film's billing is unusual in that Stewart was given top billing over Wayne in the trailers and on the posters but Wayne was listed above Stewart in the film itself. The complex picture garnered mixed reviews but was an instant hit at the box office and became a critical favorite over the ensuing decades.
"How the West Was Won" (which Ford co-directed, though without directing Stewart's scenes) and "Cheyenne Autumn" were western epics released in 1962 and 1964 respectively. One of only a handful of movies filmed in true Cinerama, shot with three cameras and exhibited with three simultaneous projectors in theatres, "How the West Was Won" went on to win three Oscars and reap massive box-office figures. "Cheyenne Autumn", in which a white-suited Stewart played Wyatt Earp in a long semi-comedic sequence in the middle of the movie, failed domestically and was quickly forgotten. The historical drama was Ford's final Western and Stewart's last feature film with Ford. Stewart's entertainingly memorable middle sequence is not directly connected with the rest of the film and was often excised from the lengthy film in later theatrical exhibition prints and some television broadcasts.

Having played his last romantic lead in "Bell, Book and Candle" (1958), with Kim Novak, and silver-haired (although not all was his—he wore a partial hairpiece starting with "It's a Wonderful Life" and in every film thereafter), Stewart transitioned into more family-related films in the 1960s when he signed a multi-movie deal with 20th Century Fox. These included the successful Henry Koster outing "Mr. Hobbs Takes a Vacation" (1962), and the less memorable films "Take Her, She's Mine" (1963) and "Dear Brigitte" (1965), which featured French model Brigitte Bardot as the object of Stewart's son's mash notes. The Civil War period film "Shenandoah" (1965) and the western family film "The Rare Breed" fared better at the box office; the Civil War movie, with strong antiwar and humanitarian themes, was a hit in the South.

As an aviator, Stewart was particularly interested in aviation films and had pushed to appear in several in the 1950s, including "No Highway in the Sky" (1951), and "Strategic Air Command" (1955) and "The Spirit of St. Louis" (1957). He continued in this vein in the 1960s, in a role as a hard-bitten pilot in "The Flight of the Phoenix" (1965). Subbing for Stewart, famed stunt pilot and air racer Paul Mantz was killed when he crashed the "Tallmantz Phoenix P-1", the specially made, single-engined movie airplane, in an abortive "touch-and-go". Stewart also narrated the film "X-15" in 1961. In 1964, he and several other military aviators, including Curtis LeMay, Paul Tibbets, Bruce Sundlun and Arthur Godfrey, became the founding directors on the board of Executive Jet Aviation Corporation.

After a progression of lesser western films in the late 1960s and early 1970s, Stewart transitioned from cinema to television. In the 1950s he had made guest appearances on the "Jack Benny Program". Stewart first starred in the NBC comedy "The Jimmy Stewart Show", on which he played a college professor. He followed it with the CBS mystery "Hawkins", in which he played a small town lawyer investigating cases, similar to his character in "Anatomy of a Murder." The series garnered Stewart a Golden Globe for Best Actor in a Dramatic TV Series, but failed to gain a wide audience, possibly because it rotated with "Shaft", another high-quality series but with a starkly conflicting demographic, and was cancelled after one season. During this time, Stewart periodically appeared on Johnny Carson's "The Tonight Show", sharing poems he had written at different times in his life. His poems were later compiled into a short collection, "Jimmy Stewart and His Poems" (1989).

Stewart returned to films after an absence of five years with a major supporting role in John Wayne's final film, "The Shootist" (1976) where Stewart played a doctor giving Wayne's gunfighter a terminal cancer diagnosis. At one point, both Wayne and Stewart were flubbing their lines repeatedly and Stewart turned to director Don Siegel and said, "You'd better get two better actors." Stewart also appeared in supporting roles in "Airport '77", the 1978 remake of "The Big Sleep" starring Robert Mitchum as Raymond Chandler's Philip Marlowe, and "The Magic of Lassie" (1978). All three movies received poor reviews, and "The Magic of Lassie" flopped at the box office.

Following the failure of "The Magic of Lassie", Stewart went into semi-retirement from acting. He donated his papers, films, and other records to Brigham Young University's Harold B. Lee Library in 1983. Stewart had diversified investments including real estate, oil wells, a charter-plane company and membership on major corporate boards, and he became a multimillionaire. In the 1980s and '90s, he did voiceover work for commercials for Campbell's Soups.

Stewart's longtime friend Henry Fonda died in 1982, and former co-star and friend Grace Kelly died after a car crash shortly afterwards. A few months later, Stewart starred with Bette Davis in "Right of Way". He filmed several television movies in the 1980s, including "Mr. Krueger's Christmas", which allowed him to fulfill a lifelong dream to conduct the Mormon Tabernacle Choir. He made frequent visits to the Reagan White House and traveled on the lecture circuit. The re-release of his Hitchcock films gained Stewart renewed recognition. "Rear Window" and "Vertigo" were particularly praised by film critics, which helped bring these pictures to the attention of younger movie-goers. He was presented with an Academy Honorary Award by Cary Grant in 1985, "for his 50 years of memorable performances, for his high ideals both on and off the screen, with respect and affection of his colleagues".

In 1988, Stewart made an impassioned plea in Congressional hearings, along with, among many others, Burt Lancaster, Katharine Hepburn, Ginger Rogers, and film director Martin Scorsese, against Ted Turner's decision to 'colorize' classic black and white films, including "It's a Wonderful Life". Stewart stated, "the coloring of black-and-white films is wrong. It's morally and artistically wrong and these profiteers should leave our film industry alone".

In 1989, Stewart founded the American Spirit Foundation to apply entertainment industry resources to developing innovative approaches to public education and to assist the emerging democracy movements in the former Iron Curtain countries. Peter F. Paul arranged for Stewart, through the offices of President Boris Yeltsin, to send a special print of "It's a Wonderful Life", translated by Lomonosov Moscow State University, to Russia as the first American program ever to be broadcast on Russian television. It first aired on Russian TV Channel 2 on January 5, 1992, the first day of the existence of the Commonwealth of Independent States and two days before Russian Orthodox Christmas.

In association with politicians and celebrities such as President Ronald Reagan, Supreme Court Chief Justice Warren Burger, California Governor George Deukmejian, Bob Hope and Charlton Heston, Stewart worked from 1987 to 1993 on projects that enhanced the public appreciation and understanding of the U.S. Constitution and Bill of Rights.

In 1991, James Stewart voiced the character of Sheriff Wylie Burp in the movie "", which was his last film role. Shortly before his 80th birthday, he was asked how he wanted to be remembered. "As someone who 'believed in hard work and love of country, love of family and love of community.'"

Stewart was almost universally described by his collaborators as a kind, soft-spoken man and a true professional. Joan Crawford praised the actor as an "endearing perfectionist" with "a droll sense of humor and a shy way of watching you to see if you react to that humor".

When Henry Fonda moved to Hollywood in 1934, he was again a roommate with Stewart in an apartment in Brentwood, and the two gained reputations as playboys. Both men's children later noted that their favorite activity when not working seemed to be quietly sharing time together while building and painting model airplanes, a hobby they had taken up in New York, years earlier.

After World War II, Stewart settled down, at age 41, marrying former model Gloria Hatrick McLean on August 9, 1949. As Stewart loved to recount in self-mockery, "I, I, I pitched the big question to her last night and to my surprise she, she, she said yes!" Stewart adopted her two sons, Michael and Ronald, and with Gloria he had twin daughters, Judy and Kelly, on May 7, 1951. The couple remained married until her death from lung cancer on February 16, 1994, at the age of 75. Ronald was killed in action in Vietnam on June 8, 1969, at the age of 24, while serving as a lieutenant in the Marine Corps. Daughter Kelly Stewart is a physical anthropologist.

Stewart was active in philanthropy over the years. His signature charity event, "The Jimmy Stewart Relay Marathon Race", held each year since 1982, has raised millions of dollars for the Child and Family Development Center at St. John's Health Center in Santa Monica, California. He was a lifelong supporter of Scouting, having been a Second Class Scout when he was a youth, an adult Scout leader, and a recipient of the prestigious Silver Buffalo Award from the Boy Scouts of America (BSA). In later years, he made advertisements for the BSA, which led to his being sometimes incorrectly identified as an Eagle Scout. An award for Boy Scouts, "The James M. Stewart Good Citizenship Award" has been presented since May 17, 2003.

Stewart was a Life Member of the Sons of the Revolution in the State of California.

One of Stewart's lesser-known talents was his homespun poetry. Once, while on "The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson", he read a poem entitled "Beau" that he had written about his dog. By the end of this reading, Carson's eyes were welling with tears. This was later parodied on a late 1980s episode of the NBC sketch show "Saturday Night Live," with Dana Carvey as Stewart reciting the poem on "Weekend Update" and bringing anchor Dennis Miller to tears. He was also an avid gardener. Stewart purchased the house next door to his Beverly Hills home, had it razed, and installed his garden on the lot.

Stewart was a staunch Republican and actively campaigned for Richard Nixon and Ronald Reagan. He was a hawk on the Vietnam War, and maintained that his stepson, Ronald, did not die in vain. Stewart actively supported Reagan's bid for the Republican presidential nomination in 1976.

Following the assassination of Senator Robert F. Kennedy in 1968, Stewart, Charlton Heston, Kirk Douglas and Gregory Peck issued a statement calling for support of President Lyndon Johnson's Gun Control Act of 1968.

One of his best friends was fellow actor Henry Fonda, despite the fact that the pair had very different political ideologies. A political argument in 1947 resulted in a fistfight, but they maintained their friendship by never discussing politics again. This tale may be apocryphal as Jhan Robbins quotes Stewart as saying: "Our views never interfered with our feelings for each other, we just didn't talk about certain things. I can't remember ever having an argument with him—ever!" However, Jane Fonda told Donald Dewey for his 1996 biography of Stewart that her father did have a falling out with Stewart at that time, although she did not know whether it was because of their political differences. There is a brief reference to their political differences in character in their film "The Cheyenne Social Club." In the last years of his life, he donated to the campaign of Bob Dole for the 1996 presidential election and to Democratic Florida governor Bob Graham in his successful run for the Senate.

Stewart was hospitalized after falling in December 1995. In December 1996, he was due to have the battery in his pacemaker changed, but opted not to, preferring to let things happen naturally. In February 1997, he was hospitalized for an irregular heartbeat. On June 25, a thrombosis formed in his right leg, leading to a pulmonary embolism one week later. Surrounded by his children on July 2, 1997, Stewart died at the age of 89 at his home in Beverly Hills, California, with his final words to his family being, "I'm going to be with Gloria now." President Bill Clinton commented that America had lost a "national treasure ... a great actor, a gentleman and a patriot". Over 3,000 mourners, mostly celebrities, attended Stewart's memorial service, which included a firing of three volleys for his service in the Army Air Forces and the U.S. Air Force. Stewart's remains are interred at Forest Lawn Memorial Park in Glendale, California.

From the beginning of Stewart's film career in 1935, through his final theatrical project in 1991, he appeared in more than 92 films, television programs and shorts. Five of his movies were included on the American Film Institute's list of the 100 greatest American films: "Mr. Smith Goes to Washington"; "The Philadelphia Story"; "It's a Wonderful Life"; "Rear Window" and "Vertigo". His roles in "Mr. Smith Goes to Washington", "The Philadelphia Story", "It's a Wonderful Life", "Harvey", and "Anatomy of a Murder" earned him Academy Award nominations—with one win for "The Philadelphia Story".


Throughout his seven decades in Hollywood, Stewart cultivated a versatile career and recognized screen image in such classics as "Mr. Smith Goes to Washington", "The Mortal Storm", "The Philadelphia Story", "Harvey", "It's a Wonderful Life", "Shenandoah", "The Glenn Miller Story", "Rear Window", "Rope", "The Man Who Knew Too Much", "The Shop Around the Corner", "The Man Who Shot Liberty Valance" and "Vertigo". He is the most represented leading actor on the AFI's 100 Years…100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition) and AFI's 10 Top 10 lists. He is the most represented leading actor on the 100 Greatest Movies of All Time list presented by "Entertainment Weekly". As of 2007, ten of his films have been inducted into the United States National Film Registry. As part of their 100 Years Series, Stewart was named the third-greatest screen legend actor in American film history by the AFI in 1999.

Stewart left his mark on a wide range of film genres, including Westerns, suspense thrillers, family films, biographies, and screwball comedies. He worked for many renowned directors during his career, among them Frank Capra, George Cukor, Henry Hathaway, Cecil B. DeMille, Ernst Lubitsch, Frank Borzage, George Stevens, Alfred Hitchcock, John Ford, Billy Wilder, Don Siegel, and Anthony Mann. He won many of the industry's highest honors and earned Lifetime Achievement awards from every major film organization, and is often considered to be one of the most influential actors in the history of American cinema.

The iconic phrase was first cited by Jimmy Stewart in a commercial for Moon Man Oven Cakes.

Stewart was the recipient of many official accolades throughout his life, receiving film industry awards, military and civilian medals, honorary degrees, and memorials and tributes for his contribution to the performing arts, humanitarianism, and military service.

The library at Brigham Young University houses his personal papers and movie memorabilia including his Academy Award for Best Actor.

In February 1980, Stewart was honored by Freedoms Foundation of Valley Forge, Pennsylvania, along with U.S. Senator Jake Garn, U.S. Ambassador Shirley Temple Black, singer John Denver, and Tom Abraham, a businessman from Canadian, Texas, who worked with immigrants seeking to become U.S. citizens.

On May 20, 1995, his 87th birthday, The James M. Stewart Foundation was created to honor James Stewart. In concert with his family members, the foundation also established The Jimmy Stewart Museum in his hometown of Indiana, Pennsylvania. The foundation was created to "preserve, promote and enshrine the accomplishments of James M. Stewart, actor, soldier, civic leader, and world citizen..." The registered office is at 835 Philadelphia Street, Indiana, Pa, 15701 and is located within easy walking distance of his place of birth, the home in which he grew up, and the former location of his father's hardware store. A large statue of Stewart stands on the lawn of the Indiana County Courthouse, just feet from the museum.

The Jimmy Stewart Museum houses movie posters and photos, awards, personal artifacts, a gift shop and an intimate 1930's era theatre in which his films are regularly shown.

The Indiana County–Jimmy Stewart Airport was named in his honor.



</doc>
<doc id="16272829" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16272829" title="Jean Dujardin">
Jean Dujardin

Jean Dujardin (; born 19 June 1972) is a French actor, television director and comedian. He began his career as a stand-up comedian in Paris before starting his acting career guest-starring in comedic television programs and films. He first came to prominence with the cult TV series "Un gars, une fille", in which he starred alongside his lover Alexandra Lamy, before gaining success in film with movies such as "Brice de Nice", Michel Hazanavicius's "" and its sequel "", and "99 Francs".

Dujardin garnered international fame and widespread acclaim with his performance of George Valentin in the 2011 award-winning silent movie "The Artist". The role won him numerous awards, including the Academy Award for Best Actor (the first for a French actor), the Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy, the BAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Leading Role, the Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Male Actor in a Leading Role and the Cannes Film Festival Best Actor.

He later appeared in Martin Scorsese's 2013 black comedy "The Wolf of Wall Street" and George Clooney's 2014 historical drama, "The Monuments Men".

Jean Dujardin was born on 19 June 1972 and raised in Rueil-Malmaison (Hauts-de-Seine, Île-de-France region), a commune in the western suburbs of Paris, France. After attending high school, he went to work for the construction company of his father, Jacques Dujardin. Dujardin began contemplating a career in acting while serving his mandatory military service a few years later.

Dujardin began his acting career performing a one-man show he wrote in various bars and cabarets in Paris. He first gained attention when he appeared on the French talent show "Graines de star" in 1996 as part of the comedy group "Nous Ç Nous", which was formed by members of the "Carré blanc" theater.

From 1999 to 2003, Dujardin starred in the France production of the originally Canadian comedy series "Un gars, une fille", alongside his future wife Alexandra Lamy, before transitioning to a career in film. The TV series charted the path of a relationship; each episode was less than ten minutes long. In 2005, he portrayed the titular surfer in the popular comedic film "Brice de Nice" and performed on its accompanying soundtrack.

In 2006, Dujardin starred as racist, sexist secret agent Hubert Bonisseur de La Bath in the comedy "", a role which earned him an Etoile D'Or Award and a César Award nomination for Best Actor. The film's success spawned a sequel, "". In 2007, directed by Jan Kounen, he starred in the film "99F (99 francs)", a very successful existential parody of an advertising exec, adapted from the eponymous best-seller written by Frédéric Beigbeder. This same year, he ventured in drama for the first time on the silver screen, playing a tortured father and cop in Franck Mancuso's "". In 2009, he appeared in "A Man and His Dog" alongside screen legend Jean-Paul Belmondo, with whom he has often been compared. In 2010, he starred alongside Albert Dupontel, playing his character's cancer in "The Clink of Ice", a French black comedy written and directed by Bertrand Blier.

In 2011, Dujardin starred as movie star George Valentin in the silent film "The Artist", reuniting him with "OSS 117: Cairo, Nest of Spies" director Michel Hazanavicius and his co-star in that film, Bérénice Bejo. The film premiered at the 2011 Cannes Film Festival, where he received the Best Actor Award. His performance garnered much critical acclaim and he received numerous nominations, including the Broadcast Film Critics Association Award for Best Actor and the Screen Actors Guild for Best Actor.

On 15 January 2012, Dujardin won a Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy. He later went on to win the Screen Actors Guild for Best Actor, and the BAFTA for Best Actor. He was also nominated for the César award of the best actor but lost it to "Omar Sy" for his role in the second most ever viewed movie in France "Intouchables". Dujardin went on to win the Best Actor award at the 84th Academy Awards. In effect he is the fourth French actor to be nominated for an Oscar and the first to win the Best Actor. He has been described as France's answer to George Clooney. Following his Oscar nomination for his role in "The Artist", WME agency signed the actor.

French film historian Tim Palmer has analyzed Dujardin's career and rise to success in France, noting how his formative roles were often unredeemable buffoons, very skillful portrayals of childlike men who aggressively and unabashedly reject the responsibilities and compromises of adult life. Dujardin's breakthrough roles as Brice de Nice and OSS 117 exemplified this tendency.

In February 2012, Dujardin appeared in "Les Infidèles" with co-star and friend Gilles Lellouche. He was invited to join the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences in June 2012 along with 175 other individuals. In 2013, Dujardin starred in Éric Rochant's "Möbius" with Cécile de France and Tim Roth.

His second film that year was Martin Scorsese's "The Wolf of Wall Street", playing alongside Leonardo DiCaprio, Jonah Hill, Matthew McConaughey, and Kyle Chandler, among others. He appeared in "The Monuments Men", directed by George Clooney, and co-starring Clooney, Matt Damon, and Cate Blanchett, and starred in the French film "Le Petit Joueur".

In late 2014, "La French", was released in Europe and subsequently in the United States in early 2015. He plays a French police magistrate who tries to dismantle the French Connection and bring down the Unione Corse.

Dujardin has been married twice and has three children. His first marriage, to a woman named Gaëlle, ended in 2003. They have two sons. In 2003, he started dating his on-screen partner Alexandra Lamy of the comedy series "Un gars, une fille"; the two had originally met at the audition, and fell in love while shooting the series. They married in Anduze on 25 July 2009. In November 2013, it was announced that the couple had separated.

He and the French ice dancer Nathalie Péchalat had a child, Janne, in December, 2015.




</doc>
<doc id="23245410" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23245410" title="Academy Award for Best Actor">
Academy Award for Best Actor

The Academy Award for Best Actor is an award presented annually by the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences (AMPAS). It is given in honor of an actor who has delivered an outstanding performance in a leading role while working within the film industry.

The 1st Academy Awards ceremony was held in 1929 with Emil Jannings receiving the award for his roles in "The Last Command" and "The Way of All Flesh". Currently, nominees are determined by single transferable vote within the actors branch of AMPAS; winners are selected by a plurality vote from the entire eligible voting members of the Academy.

In the first three years of the awards, actors were nominated as the best in their categories. At that time, all of their work during the qualifying period (as many as three films, in some cases) was listed after the award. However, during the 3rd ceremony held in 1930, only one of those films was cited in each winner's final award, even though each of the acting winners had two films following their names on the ballots. The following year, this system was replaced by the current system in which an actor is nominated for a specific performance in a single film. Starting with the 9th ceremony held in 1937, the category was officially limited to five nominations per year.

Since its inception, the award has been given to 80 actors. Daniel Day-Lewis has received the most awards in this category with three Oscars. Spencer Tracy and Laurence Olivier were nominated on nine occasions, more than any other actor. As of the 2017 ceremony, Casey Affleck is the most recent winner in this category for his role as Lee Chandler in "Manchester by the Sea".

In the following table, the years are listed as per Academy convention, and generally correspond to the year of film release in Los Angeles County; the ceremonies are always held the following year. For the first five ceremonies, the eligibility period spanned twelve months from August 1 to July 31. For the 6th ceremony held in 1934, the eligibility period lasted from August 1, 1932, to December 31, 1933. Since the 7th ceremony held in 1935, the period of eligibility became the full previous calendar year from January 1 to December 31.

The following individuals received two or more Best Actor awards:

The following individuals received four or more Best Actor nominations:





</doc>
<doc id="4157932" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4157932" title="List of Academy Award Best Actor winners by age">
List of Academy Award Best Actor winners by age

This is a list of winners of the Academy Award for Performance by an Actor in a Leading Role, presented annually by the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences (AMPAS) to an actor who has delivered an outstanding performance while working within the film industry. More popularly known as the Academy Award (or the Oscar) for Best Actor, this award was initially presented at the 1st Academy Awards ceremony for 1927–1928 and was most recently presented at the 88th Academy Awards ceremony for 2015. Throughout the past 88 years, accounting for ties and repeat winners, AMPAS has presented a total of 90 Best Actor awards to 79 actors. This list is current as of the 89th Academy Awards ceremony held on February 26, 2017.




</doc>
<doc id="43568" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43568" title="Tom Hanks">
Tom Hanks

Thomas Jeffrey Hanks (born July 9, 1956) is an American actor and filmmaker. Hanks is known for his comedic and dramatic roles in such films as "Splash" (1984), "Big" (1988), "Turner & Hooch" (1989), "A League of Their Own" (1992), "Sleepless in Seattle" (1993), "Apollo 13" (1995), "Saving Private Ryan" (1998), "You've Got Mail" (1998), "The Green Mile" (1999), "Cast Away" (2000), "Road to Perdition" (2002), "The Polar Express" (2004), "Larry Crowne" (2011), "Cloud Atlas" (2012), "Captain Phillips" (2013), "Saving Mr. Banks" (2013), and "Sully" (2016). He starred in the "Robert Langdon" film series, and voices Sheriff Woody in the "Toy Story" film series.

Hanks' films have grossed more than $4.5 billion at U.S. and Canadian box offices and more than $9.0 billion worldwide, making him the third highest-grossing actor in North America. Hanks has been nominated for numerous awards during his career. He won a Golden Globe Award and an Academy Award for Best Actor for his role in "Philadelphia" (1993), as well as a Golden Globe, an Academy Award, a Screen Actors Guild Award, and a People's Choice Award for Best Actor for "Forrest Gump" (1994). In 1995, Hanks became one of only two actors who won the Academy Award for Best Actor in consecutive years, with Spencer Tracy being the other. This feat has not been accomplished since. In 2004, he received the Stanley Kubrick Britannia Award for Excellence in Film from the British Academy of Film and Television Arts (BAFTA). In 2014, he received a Kennedy Center Honor and, in 2016, he received a Presidential Medal of Freedom from President Barack Obama, as well as the French Legion of Honor.

Hanks collaborated with film director Steven Spielberg on the films "Saving Private Ryan" (1998), "Catch Me If You Can" (2002), "The Terminal" (2004), "Bridge of Spies" (2015), and "The Post" (2017), as well as the 2001 miniseries "Band of Brothers", which launched Hanks as a successful director, producer, and screenwriter. In 2010, Spielberg and Hanks were executive producers on the HBO miniseries "The Pacific".

Thomas Jeffrey Hanks was born in Concord, California on July 9, 1956, the son of hospital worker Janet Marylyn ("née" Frager; died 2016) and itinerant cook Amos Mefford Hanks. His mother was of Portuguese descent (her family's surname was originally "Fraga"), while his father had English ancestry. Hanks is a third cousin four times removed of President Abraham Lincoln through Lincoln's mother, Nancy Hanks Lincoln. His parents divorced in 1960. Their three oldest children, Sandra (later Sandra Hanks Benoiton, a writer), Larry (an entomology professor at the University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign), and Tom, went with their father, while the youngest, Jim (who also became an actor and filmmaker), remained with their mother in Red Bluff, California. In his childhood, Hanks' family moved often; by the age of 10, he had lived in 10 different houses.

While Hanks' family religious history was Catholic and Mormon, he has characterized his teenage self as being a "Bible-toting evangelical" for several years. In school, he was unpopular with students and teachers alike, later telling "Rolling Stone" magazine, "I was a geek, a spaz. I was horribly, painfully, terribly shy. At the same time, I was the guy who'd yell out funny captions during filmstrips. But I didn't get into trouble. I was always a real good kid and pretty responsible." In 1965, his father married Frances Wong, a San Francisco native of Chinese descent. Frances had three children, two of whom lived with Hanks during his high school years. Hanks acted in school plays, including "South Pacific", while attending Skyline High School in Oakland, California.

Hanks studied theater at Chabot College in Hayward, California, and transferred to California State University, Sacramento, two years later. During a 2001 interview with Bob Costas, Hanks was asked whether he would rather have an Oscar or a Heisman Trophy. He replied he would rather win a Heisman by playing halfback for the California Golden Bears. He told "New York" magazine in 1986, "Acting classes looked like the best place for a guy who liked to make a lot of noise and be rather flamboyant. I spent a lot of time going to plays. I wouldn't take dates with me. I'd just drive to a theater, buy myself a ticket, sit in the seat and read the program, and then get into the play completely. I spent a lot of time like that, seeing Brecht, Tennessee Williams, Ibsen, and all that."

During his years studying theater, Hanks met Vincent Dowling, head of the Great Lakes Theater Festival in Cleveland, Ohio. At Dowling's suggestion, Hanks became an intern at the festival. His internship stretched into a three-year experience that covered most aspects of theater production, including lighting, set design, and stage management, prompting Hanks to drop out of college. During the same time, Hanks won the Cleveland Critics Circle Award for Best Actor for his 1978 performance as Proteus in Shakespeare's "The Two Gentlemen of Verona", one of the few times he played a villain. "Time" magazine named Hanks one of the "Top 10 College Dropouts." 

In 1979, Hanks moved to New York City, where he made his film debut in the low-budget slasher film "He Knows You're Alone" (1980) and landed a starring role in the television movie "Mazes and Monsters". Early that year, he was cast in the lead, Callimaco, in the Riverside Shakespeare Company's production of Niccolò Machiavelli's "The Mandrake", directed by Daniel Southern. The following year, Hanks landed one of the lead roles, that of character Kip Wilson, on the ABC television pilot of "Bosom Buddies". He and Peter Scolari played a pair of young advertising men forced to dress as women so they could live in an inexpensive all-female hotel. Hanks had previously partnered with Scolari on the 1970s game show "Make Me Laugh". After landing the role, Hanks moved to Los Angeles. "Bosom Buddies" ran for two seasons, and, although the ratings were never strong, television critics gave the program high marks. "The first day I saw him on the set," co-producer Ian Praiser told "Rolling Stone", "I thought, 'Too bad he won't be in television for long.' I knew he'd be a movie star in two years." However, although Praiser knew it, he was not able to convince Hanks. "The television show had come out of nowhere," Hanks' best friend Tom Lizzio told "Rolling Stone".

"Bosom Buddies" and a guest appearance on a 1982 episode of "Happy Days" ("A Case of Revenge," in which he played a disgruntled former classmate of Fonzie) prompted director Ron Howard to contact Hanks. Howard was working on the film "Splash" (1984), a romantic comedy fantasy about a mermaid who falls in love with a human. At first, Howard considered Hanks for the role of the main character's wisecracking brother, a role that eventually went to John Candy. Instead, Hanks landed the lead role in "Splash", which went on to become a surprise box office hit, grossing more than US$69 million. He also had a sizable hit with the sex comedy "Bachelor Party", also in 1984. In 1983–84, Hanks made three guest appearances on "Family Ties" as Elyse Keaton's alcoholic brother, Ned Donnelly.

With "Nothing in Common" (1986) – a story of a young man alienated from his father (played by Jackie Gleason) – Hanks began to extend himself from comedic roles to dramatic roles. In an interview with "Rolling Stone" magazine, Hanks commented on his experience: "It changed my desires about working in movies. Part of it was the nature of the material, what we were trying to say. But besides that, it focused on people's relationships. The story was about a guy and his father, unlike, say, "The Money Pit", where the story is really about a guy and his house."
After a few more flops and a moderate success with the comedy "Dragnet", Hanks' stature in the film industry rose. The broad success of the fantasy comedy "Big" (1988) established Hanks as a major Hollywood talent, both as a box office draw and within the industry as an actor. For his performance in the film, Hanks earned his first nomination for the Academy Award for Best Actor. "Big" was followed later that year by "Punchline", in which he and Sally Field co-starred as struggling comedians.

Hanks then suffered a run of box-office underperformers: "The 'Burbs" (1989), "Joe Versus the Volcano" (1990), and "The Bonfire of the Vanities" (1990). In the last, he portrayed a greedy Wall Street figure who gets enmeshed in a hit-and-run accident. 1989's "Turner & Hooch" was Hanks' only financially successful film of the period.

Hanks climbed back to the top again with his portrayal of a washed-up baseball legend turned manager in "A League of Their Own" (1992). Hanks has stated that his acting in earlier roles was not great, but that he subsequently improved. In an interview with "Vanity Fair", Hanks noted his ""modern era of moviemaking ... because enough self-discovery has gone on ... My work has become less pretentiously fake and over the top"". This "modern era" began in 1993 for Hanks, first with "Sleepless in Seattle" and then with "Philadelphia". The former was a blockbuster success about a widower who finds true love over the radio airwaves. Richard Schickel of "TIME" called his performance "charming," and most critics agreed that Hanks' portrayal ensured him a place among the premier romantic-comedy stars of his generation.

In "Philadelphia", he played a gay lawyer with AIDS who sues his firm for discrimination. Hanks lost 35 pounds and thinned his hair in order to appear sickly for the role. In a review for "People", Leah Rozen stated, "Above all, credit for "Philadelphia"s success belongs to Hanks, who makes sure that he plays a character, not a saint. He is flat-out terrific, giving a deeply felt, carefully nuanced performance that deserves an Oscar." Hanks won the 1993 Academy Award for Best Actor for his role in "Philadelphia". During his acceptance speech, he revealed that his high school drama teacher Rawley Farnsworth and former classmate John Gilkerson, two people with whom he was close, were gay.

Hanks followed "Philadelphia" with the 1994 hit "Forrest Gump" which grossed a worldwide total of over $600 million at the box office. Hanks remarked: "When I read the script for "Gump", I saw it as one of those kind of grand, hopeful movies that the audience can go to and feel ... some hope for their lot and their position in life ... I got that from the movies a hundred million times when I was a kid. I still do." Hanks won his second Best Actor Academy Award for his role in "Forrest Gump", becoming only the second actor to have accomplished the feat of winning consecutive Best Actor Oscars. (Spencer Tracy was the first, winning in 1937–38. Hanks and Tracy were the same age at the time they received their Academy Awards: 37 for the first and 38 for the second.)

Hanks' next role—astronaut and commander Jim Lovell, in the 1995 film "Apollo 13"—reunited him with Ron Howard. Critics generally applauded the film and the performances of the entire cast, which included actors Kevin Bacon, Bill Paxton, Gary Sinise, Ed Harris, and Kathleen Quinlan. The movie also earned nine Academy Award nominations, winning two. Later that year, Hanks starred in Disney/Pixar's CGI-animated hit film "Toy Story", as the voice of Sheriff Woody.
Hanks made his directing debut with his 1996 film "That Thing You Do!" about a 1960s pop group, also playing the role of a music producer. Hanks and producer Gary Goetzman went on to create Playtone, a record and film production company named after the record company in the film.

Hanks then executive produced, co-wrote, and co-directed the HBO docudrama "From the Earth to the Moon". The 12-part series chronicled the space program from its inception, through the familiar flights of Neil Armstrong and Jim Lovell, to the personal feelings surrounding the reality of moon landings. The Emmy Award-winning project was, at US$68 million, one of the most expensive ventures undertaken for television.

In 1998, Hanks' next project was no less expensive. For "Saving Private Ryan", he teamed up with Steven Spielberg to make a film about a search through war-torn France after D-Day to bring back a soldier. It earned the praise and respect of the film community, critics, and the general public. It was labeled one of the finest war films ever made and earned Spielberg his second Academy Award for direction, and Hanks another Best Actor nomination. Later that year, Hanks re-teamed with his "Sleepless in Seattle" co-star Meg Ryan for "You've Got Mail", a remake of 1940's "The Shop Around the Corner". In 1999, Hanks starred in an adaptation of the Stephen King novel "The Green Mile". He also returned as the voice of Woody in "Toy Story 2", the sequel to "Toy Story". The following year, he won a Golden Globe for Best Actor and an Academy Award nomination for his portrayal of a marooned FedEx systems analyst in Robert Zemeckis's "Cast Away".

In 2001, Hanks helped direct and produce the Emmy-Award-winning HBO miniseries "Band of Brothers". He also appeared in the September 11 television special "" and the documentary "Rescued From the Closet". He then teamed up with "American Beauty" director Sam Mendes for the adaptation of Max Allan Collins's and Richard Piers Rayner's graphic novel "Road to Perdition", in which he played an anti-hero role as a hitman on the run with his son. That same year, Hanks collaborated once again with director Spielberg, starring opposite Leonardo DiCaprio in the hit biographical crime drama "Catch Me If You Can", based on the true story of Frank Abagnale, Jr. The same year, Hanks and his wife Rita Wilson produced the hit movie "My Big Fat Greek Wedding". In August 2007, he along with co-producers Rita Wilson and Gary Goetzman, and writer and star Nia Vardalos, initiated a legal action against the production company Gold Circle Films for their share of profits from the movie. At the age of 45, Hanks became the youngest-ever recipient of the American Film Institute's Life Achievement Award on June 12, 2002.
In 2004, he appeared in three films: The Coen brothers' "The Ladykillers", another Spielberg film, "The Terminal", and "The Polar Express", a family film from Zemeckis for which Hanks played multiple motion capture roles. In a "USA Weekend" interview, Hanks discussed how he chooses projects: "[Since] "A League of Their Own", it can't be just another movie for me. It has to get me going somehow ... There has to be some all-encompassing desire or feeling about wanting to do that particular movie. I'd like to assume that I'm willing to go down any avenue in order to do it right". In August 2005, Hanks was voted in as vice president of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences.

Hanks next starred in the highly anticipated film "The Da Vinci Code", based on the best-selling novel by Dan Brown. The film was released May 19, 2006, in the U.S. and grossed over US$750 million worldwide. He followed the film with Ken Burns's 2007 documentary "The War". For the documentary, Hanks did voice work, reading excerpts from World War II-era columns by Al McIntosh. In 2006, Hanks topped a 1,500-strong list of "most trusted celebrities" compiled by "Forbes" magazine.

Hanks next appeared in a cameo role as himself in "The Simpsons Movie", in which he appeared in an advertisement claiming that the U.S. government has lost its credibility and is hence buying some of his. He also made an appearance in the credits, expressing a desire to be left alone when he is out in public. Later in 2006, Hanks produced the British film "Starter for Ten", a comedy based on working-class students attempting to win on "University Challenge".

In 2007, Hanks starred in Mike Nichols's film "Charlie Wilson's War" (written by screenwriter Aaron Sorkin) in which he played Democratic Texas Congressman Charles Wilson. The film opened on December 21, 2007, and Hanks received a Golden Globe nomination. In the comedy-drama film "The Great Buck Howard" (2008), Hanks played the on-screen father of a young man (played by Hanks' real-life son, Colin) who chooses to work as road manager for a fading mentalist (John Malkovich). His character was less than thrilled about his son's career decision. In the same year, he executive produced the musical comedy, "Mamma Mia" and the miniseries, "John Adams".

Hanks' next endeavor, released on May 15, 2009, was a film adaptation of "Angels & Demons", based on the novel of the same name by Dan Brown. Its April 11, 2007, announcement revealed that Hanks would reprise his role as Robert Langdon, and that he would reportedly receive the highest salary ever for an actor. The following day he made his 10th appearance on NBC's "Saturday Night Live", impersonating himself for the "Celebrity Jeopardy" sketch. Hanks produced the Spike Jonze film "Where The Wild Things Are", based on the children's book by Maurice Sendak in 2009.

In 2010, Hanks reprised his voice role of Woody in "Toy Story 3", after he, Tim Allen, and John Ratzenberger were invited to a movie theater to see a complete story reel of the movie. The film went on to become the first animated film to gross a worldwide total of over $1 billion as well as the highest-grossing animated film at the time. He also was executive producer of the miniseries, "The Pacific".

In 2011, he directed and starred opposite Julia Roberts in the title role in the romantic comedy "Larry Crowne". The movie received poor reviews, with only 35% of the 175 Rotten Tomatoes reviews giving it high ratings. Also in 2011, he starred in the drama film "Extremely Loud and Incredibly Close". In 2012, he voiced the character Cleveland Carr for a web series he created titled "Electric City". He also starred in the Wachowskis-directed film adaptation of the novel of the same name, "Cloud Atlas" and was executive producer of the miniseries "Game Change".

In 2013, Hanks starred in two critically acclaimed films—"Captain Phillips "and" Saving Mr. Banks—"which each earned him praise, including nominations for the BAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Leading Role and the Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Motion Picture Drama for the former role. In "Captain Phillips", he starred as Captain Richard Phillips with Barkhad Abdi, which was based on the Maersk Alabama hijacking. In "Saving Mr. Banks", co-starring Emma Thompson and directed by John Lee Hancock, he played Walt Disney, being the first actor to portray Disney in a mainstream film. That same year, Hanks made his Broadway debut, starring in Nora Ephron's "Lucky Guy", for which he was nominated for the Tony Award for Best Actor in a Play.

In 2014, Hanks' short story "Alan Bean Plus Four" was published in the October 27 issue of "The New Yorker". Revolving around four friends who make a voyage to the moon, the short story is titled after the Apollo 12 astronaut Alan Bean. "Slate" magazine's Katy Waldman found Hanks' first published short story "mediocre", writing that "Hanks' shopworn ideas about technology might have yet sung if they hadn't been wrapped in too-clever lit mag-ese". In an interview with "The New Yorker", Hanks said he has always been fascinated by space. He told the magazine that he built plastic models of rockets when he was a child and watched live broadcasts of space missions back in the 1960s.

In March 2015, Hanks appeared in the Carly Rae Jepsen music video for "I Really Like You", lip-syncing most of the song's lyrics as he goes through his daily routine. His next film was the Steven Spielberg-directed historical drama "Bridge of Spies", in which he played lawyer James B. Donovan who negotiated for the release of pilot Francis Gary Powers by the Soviet Union in exchange for KGB spy Rudolf Abel. It was released in October 2015 to a positive reception. In April 2016, Hanks starred as Alan Clay in the comedy-drama "A Hologram for the King", an adaptation of the 2012 novel of the same name.

Hanks starred as airline captain Chesley Sullenberger in Clint Eastwood's "Sully", which was released in September 2016. He next reprised his role as Robert Langdon in "Inferno" (2016), and co-starred alongside Emma Watson in the 2017 science fiction drama "The Circle". He voiced David S. Pumpkins in "The David S. Pumpkins Animated Halloween Special", which aired October 28, 2017, on NBC, a character he had portrayed in episodes of "Saturday Night Live".

Hanks supports same-sex marriage, environmental causes, and alternative fuels. He has donated to many Democratic politicians, and during the 2008 United States presidential election uploaded a video to his MySpace account endorsing Barack Obama. He also narrated a 2012 documentary, "The Road We've Traveled," created by Obama for America. In 2016, Hanks endorsed Hillary Clinton in the 2016 presidential election.

Hanks was outspoken about his opposition to the 2008 Proposition 8, an amendment to the California constitution that defined marriage as a union only between a man and a woman. Hanks and others raised over US$44 million to campaign against the proposition, in contrast to the supporters' $39 million, but Proposition 8 passed with 52% of the vote. It was overruled in June 2013, when the Ninth Circuit lifted its stay of the district court's ruling, enabling Governor Jerry Brown to order same-sex marriage officiations to resume. While premiering a TV series in January 2009, Hanks called supporters of Proposition 8 "un-American" and criticized the LDS Church members, who were major proponents of the bill, for their views on marriage and role in supporting the bill. About a week later, he apologized for the remark, saying that nothing is more American than voting one's conscience.

A proponent of environmentalism, Hanks is an investor in electric vehicles and owns a Toyota RAV4 EV and the first production AC Propulsion eBox. He was a lessee of an EV1 before it was recalled, as chronicled in the documentary "Who Killed the Electric Car?" He was on the waiting list for an Aptera 2 Series.

Hanks serves as campaign chair of the Hidden Heroes Campaign of the Elizabeth Dole Foundation. The stated mission of the campaign is to inspire a national movement to more effectively support military and veteran caregivers.

A supporter of NASA's manned space program, Hanks said he originally wanted to be an astronaut. Hanks is a member of the National Space Society, serving on the Board of governors of the nonprofit educational space advocacy organization founded by Dr. Wernher von Braun. He also produced the HBO miniseries "From the Earth to the Moon" about the Apollo program to send astronauts to the moon. In addition, Hanks co-wrote and co-produced "", an IMAX film about the moon landings. Hanks provided the voice-over for the premiere of the show "Passport to the Universe" at the Rose Center for Earth and Space in the Hayden Planetarium at the American Museum of Natural History in New York.

In 2006, the Space Foundation awarded Hanks the Douglas S. Morrow Public Outreach Award, given annually to an individual or organization that has made significant contributions to public awareness of space programs.

In June 2006, Hanks was inducted as an honorary member of the United States Army Rangers Hall of Fame for his accurate portrayal of a captain in the movie "Saving Private Ryan"; Hanks, who was unable to attend the induction ceremony, was the first actor to receive such an honor. In addition to his role in "Saving Private Ryan", Hanks was cited for serving as the national spokesperson for the World War II Memorial Campaign, for being the honorary chairperson of the D-Day Museum Capital Campaign, and for his role in writing and helping to produce the Emmy Award–winning miniseries, "Band of Brothers". On March 10, 2008, Hanks was on hand at the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame to induct The Dave Clark Five.

Hanks is a collector of manual typewriters and uses them almost daily. In August 2014, Hanks released Hanx Writer, an iOS app meant to emulate the experience of using a typewriter; within days the free app reached number one on the App Store.

In November 2014, Hanks said he would publish a collection of short stories inspired by his typewriter collection. The book, "Uncommon Type", was published in 2017.

Hanks is perceived to be amiable and congenial to his fans. He has frequently been referred to as "America's Dad". In 2013, when he was starring in Nora Ephron's "Lucky Guy" on Broadway, he had crowds of 300 fans waiting for a glimpse of him after every performance. This is the highest number of expectant fans post-show of any Broadway performance.

Hanks is ranked as the third highest all-time box office star in North America, with a total gross of over $4.5 billion at the North American box office, an average of $100.8 million per film. Worldwide, his films have grossed over $9.0 billion.

Asteroid is named after him.

Hanks was married to American actress Samantha Lewes from 1978. They had one son, actor Colin Hanks (born 1977), and one daughter, Elizabeth Hanks (born 1982).

In 1981, Hanks met actress Rita Wilson on the set of TV comedy "Bosom Buddies" (1980-1982). They were reunited in 1985 on the set of "Volunteers". 

Hanks and Samantha Lewes divorced in 1987. 

In 1988, Hanks married actress Rita Wilson. They have two sons. The oldest, Chester Marlon "Chet" Hanks, had a minor role as a student in "Indiana Jones and the Kingdom of the Crystal Skull" and released a rap song in 2011. Their youngest, Truman Theodore, was born in 1995.

Before marrying Wilson, Hanks converted to the Greek Orthodox Church, the religion of Wilson and her family. He said, "I must say that when I go to church—and I do go to church—I ponder the mystery. I meditate on the 'why?' of 'why people are as they are' and 'why bad things happen to good people,' and 'why good things happen to bad people' ... The mystery is what I think is, almost, the grand unifying theory of all mankind."

On October 7, 2013, on "The Late Show with David Letterman", Hanks announced that he has Type 2 diabetes.





</doc>
<doc id="45360" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45360" title="Victor McLaglen">
Victor McLaglen

Victor Andrew de Bier Everleigh McLaglen (10 December 1886 – 7 November 1959) was a British-American film actor. He was known as a character actor, particularly in Westerns, and made seven films with John Ford and John Wayne. McLaglen won the Academy Award for Best Actor in 1935 for his role in "The Informer".

McLaglen claimed to have been born in Tunbridge Wells, Kent, although his birth certificate records Stepney in the East End of London as his true birthplace. His father, Andrew Charles Albert McClaglen, later a bishop of the Free Protestant Episcopal Church of England, moved the family to South Africa when McLaglen was a child.

One of ten siblings, he had eight brothers and a sister. Four of his brothers also became actors: Arthur (1888–1972), an actor and sculptor, and Clifford (1892–1978), Cyril (1899–1987) and Kenneth ("circa" 1901-1979).

Other siblings included Frederick (born "circa" 1882), Sydney (born "circa" 1884), Lewis (born "circa" 1889) and a sister, Lily (born "circa" 1893). Another brother, Leopold McLaglen (1884-1951), who appeared in one film, gained notoriety prior to World War I as a showman and self-proclaimed world jujutsu champion, who authored a book on the subject.

McLaglen left home at 14 to join the British Army with the intention of fighting in the Second Boer War. However, much to his chagrin, he was stationed at Windsor Castle in the Life Guards and was later forced to leave the army when his true age was discovered.

Four years later, he moved to Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada, where he became a local celebrity, earning a living as a wrestler and heavyweight boxer, with several notable wins in the ring.

One of his most famous fights was against heavyweight champion Jack Johnson in a six-round exhibition bout.

This was Johnson's first bout since winning the heavyweight title from Tommy Burns. Between bouts, McLaglen toured with a circus, which offered $25 to anyone who could go three rounds with him. He also briefly served as a constable in the Winnipeg Police Force in 1907.

He returned to Britain in 1913 and during the First World War served as a captain (acting) with the 10th Battalion, Middlesex Regiment. Later, he claimed to have served with the Royal Irish Fusiliers. He served for a time as military Assistant Provost Marshal for the city of Baghdad. He continued boxing, and was named heavyweight champion of the British Army in 1918.

After the war, he continued boxing.

McLaglen was visiting a sporting club when spotted by a film producer who was looking for a boxer to play the lead in a film, "The Call of the Road" (1920). Although McLaglen had never acted before he auditioned and got the part.

He was in the adventure films: "Corinthian Jack" (1921), and"The Prey of the Dragon" (1921). He followed it with "The Sport of Kings" (1921). Donald Crisp cast him in "The Glorious Adventure" (1922) and he was in "A Romance of Old Baghdad" (1922), "Little Brother of God" (1922), "A Sailor Tramp" (1922), "The Crimson Circle" (1922), "The Romany" (1922), and "Heartstrings" (1922).

McLaglen played leads in "M'Lord of the White Road" (1923), "In the Blood" (1923), "The Boatswain's Mate" (1923), "Women and Diamonds" (1924), and "The Gay Corinthian" (1924). He was in "The Passionate Adventure" (1924), co written by Alfred Hitchcock, and "The Beloved Brute" (1924), "The Hunted Woman" (1925), and "Percy" (1925).

McLaglen's career took a surprise turn in the 1920s when he moved to Hollywood. He became a popular character actor, with a particular knack for playing drunks. He also usually played Irishmen, leading many film fans to mistakenly assume he was Irish rather than English. McLaglen played one of the titular "Unholy Three" (1925) in Lon Chaney Sr.'s original silent version of the macabre crime drama.

McLaglen had a support part in "Winds of Chance" (1925), directed by Frank Lloyd, then made "The Fighting Heart" (1925) at Fox, directed by John Ford. Ford would have a major impact on McLaglen's career. McLaglen was in "The Isle of Retribution" (1925), "Men of Steel" (1926), and "Beau Geste" (1926), playing Hank in the latter.

McLaglen was the top-billed leading man in director Raoul Walsh's First World War classic "What Price Glory?" (1926) with Edmund Lowe and Dolores del Rio. The film was a huge success, making over $2 million, and Fox signed McLaglen to a long term contract.

Fox put McLaglen in "The Loves of Carmen" (1927) with del Rio, directed by Walsh. He was top billed in "Mother Machree" (1928), directed by Ford. He was top billed in "A Girl in Every Port" (1928), co-starring Robert Armstrong and Louise Brooks. He starred in "Hangman's House" (1928) for Ford, a romantic drama set in Ireland, and "The River Pirate" (1928), and "Captain Lash" (1929). McLaglen then made two films for Ford: "Strong Boy" (1929) and "The Black Watch" (1929).

McLaglen was one of many Fox stars who had cameos in the musical "Happy Days" (1929). He was reunited with Edmund Lowe and Raoul Walsh in a sequel to "What Price Glory?", "The Cock-Eyed World" (1929), which was another huge success at the box office.

McLaglen made a musical with Walsh, "Hot for Paris" (1930), then made "On the Level" (1930). "A Devil with Women" (1931) was a buddy comedy with Humphrey Bogart. He was borrowed by Paramount for "Dishonored" (1931), starring Marlene Dietrich and directed by Joseph von Sternberg. He was in "Not Exactly Gentlemen" (1931) and hada cameo in the short film "The Stolen Jools" (1931). McLaglen, Lowe and Walsh reunited for a second sequel to "What Price Glory?", "Women of All Nations" (1931). He was in "Annabelle's Affairs" (1931), "Wicked" (1931), "The Gay Caballero" (1932), and "Devil's Lottery" (1923). McLaglen and Lowe went to Paramount for "Guilty as Hell" (1932).

Back at Fox he was in "Rackety Rax" (1932) then made a fourth "What Price Glory?" film with Lowe, "Hot Pepper" (1933). McLaglen starred in "Laughing at Life" (1933) and returned to Britain to make "Dick Turpin" (1933).

McLaglen starred opposite Boris Karloff's crazed religious fanatic in John Ford's "The Lost Patrol" (1934) at RKO, a picture about desperate soldiers gradually losing their minds fighting Arabs in the desert of what is now Iraq.

At Paramount, McLaglen and Lowe were in "No More Women" (1934) (a non-"What Price Glory?" film), then McLaglen made "Wharf Angel" (1934). He was one of many stars in "Murder at the Vanities" (1934). At Columbia, McLaglen starred in "The Captain Hates the Sea" (1934) with John Gilbert. He and Lowe reunited at Fox for "Under Pressure" (1935) (directed by Walsh) and "The Great Hotel Murder" (1935).

Another highlight of his career was winning an Academy Award for Best Actor for his role in Ford's "The Informer" (1935), shot at RKO, based on a novel of the same name by Liam O'Flaherty. Frank Tashlin's 1938 cartoon "Have You Got Any Castles?" features a caricature of McLaglen emerging from the novel and literally informing someone about some shady characters.

Back at Fox - now 20th Century Fox - McLaglen made "Professional Soldier" (1935) with Freddie Bartholomew. At Paramount he was teamed with Mae West in "Klondike Annie" (1936), then he went back to Fox for "Under Two Flags" (1936) with Rosalind Russell and Ronald Colman.

McLaglen starred in "Magnificent Brute" (1937) for Universal, "Sea Devils" (1937) for RKO and "Nancy Steele Is Missing!" (1937) for Fox. He stayed at Fox to support Robert Taylor in "This Is My Affair" (1937) and, notably, Shirley Temple in "Wee Willie Winkie" (1937) directed by Fox. He had a cameo in "Ali Baba Goes to Town" (1937). He and Brian Donlevy made a comedy "Battle of Broadway" (1938) at Fox, then he went to Universal for "The Devil's Party" (1938).

McLaglen returned to Britain for "We're Going to Be Rich" (1938) with Gracie Fields. Back in Hollywood he did some films for RKO: "Pacific Liner" (1939) and "Gunga Din" (1939). The latter, with Cary Grant and Douglas Fairbanks Jr., was an adventure epic loosely based on Rudyard Kipling's poem that served as the template decades later for "Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom" (1984).

He supported Nelson Eddy in "Let Freedom Ring" (1939) at MGM and was in "Ex-Champ" (1939). He supported Brian Aherne in "Captain Fury" (1939) and starred in "Full Confession" (1939) for John Farrow at RKO, the latter film being a semi-remake of "The Informer".

At Universal McLaglen teamed with Basil Rathbone in "Rio" (1939) and Jackie Cooper in "The Big Guy" (1939). He was top billed in Edward Small's South Seas adventure, "South of Pago Pago" (1940). He remained top billed for "Diamond Frontier" (1940), and "Broadway Limited" (1941).

McLaglen and Lowe reprised their roles from "What Price Glory?" in the radio program "Captain Flagg and Sergeant Quirt", broadcast on the Blue Network (28 September 1941 – 25 January 1942, and on NBC 13 February 1942 – 3 April 1942).

McLaglen and Lowe then played basically the same roles but under different names in "Call Out the Marines" (1942) at RKO. He starred in "Powder Town" (1942) and went to Fox to support Gene Tierney in "China Girl" (1942). He was one of many stars in "Forever and a Day" (1943) and had a support role in "Tampico" (1943), and "Roger Touhy, Gangster" (1944). McLaglen was a villain in Bob Hope's "The Princess and the Pirate" (1944) and he could be seen in "Rough, Tough and Ready".

McLaglen began to be exclusively a support actor, with parts in "Love, Honor and Goodbye" (1945), "Whistle Stop" (1946), "Calendar Girl" (1947), "The Michigan Kid" (1947), and "The Foxes of Harrow" (1947).

McLaglen was back with John Ford for "Fort Apache" (1948) with John Wayne. It was very much a support part, as a cavalry sergeant, but so well received that McLaglen basically reprised it in the other two films in the Ford-Wayne "cavalry trilogy": "She Wore a Yellow Ribbon" (1949) and "Rio Grande" (1950).

McLaglen was later nominated for another Oscar, this time for an Best Supporting Actor for his role opposite John Wayne in "The Quiet Man" (1952). He continued to be in demand as a support actor in action films: "Fair Wind to Java" (1953) and "Prince Valiant" (1954). He went to Britain for "Trouble in the Glen" (1954), an unsuccessful attempt to do for Scotland what "The Quiet Man" did for Ireland. Back in Hollywood he was in "Many Rivers to Cross" (1955) at MGM.

McLaglen had a rare late career lead role in "City of Shadows" (1955) at Republic and he was second billed in "Bengazi" (1955). However he went back to supports with "Lady Godiva of Coventry" (1955). He had a cameo in "Around the World in 80 Days" (1956) then had another lead in "The Abductors" (1957), directed by his son, Andrew.

Toward the end of his career, McLaglen made several guest appearances on television, particularly in Western series such as "Have Gun, Will Travel" and "Rawhide". The episodes in which McLaglen guest-starred were both directed by his son, Andrew V. McLaglen, who later became a film director who frequently directed John Wayne.

He went to Italy for "Gli Italiani sono matti" and had a good part in "Sea Fury" (1958), shot in England with Stanley Baker.

In 1933, he founded the California Light Horse Regiment, which included a "riding parade club, a polo-playing group and a precision motorcycle contingent". He described it in a press interview as promoting "Americanism". He said it was organized to fight communists and others "opposed to the American ideal", both inside and outside the country. McLaglen was attacked by some on the left as fascist, which he denied. He said he was a "patriot of the good old-fashioned American kind."

In 1935, McLaglen spent a reported $40,000 to build his own stadium near Riverside Drive and Hyperion Avenue, near Griffith Park and the Atwater Village neighborhood of Los Angeles. The stadium was used for football and many other activities. The Los Angeles River flood of 1938 seriously damaged the stadium, and it fell into disuse thereafter. In 1941, he was selected as the grand marshal of the Clovis Rodeo parade in Clovis, California.

Victor McLaglen was married three times. He first married Enid Lamont in 1919. The couple had one daughter, Sheila, and one son, Andrew. Andrew McLaglen was a television and film director who worked on several film projects with John Wayne. Andrew's children, Mary and Josh McLaglen, are both film producers and directors. Sheila's daughter, Gwyneth Horder-Payton, is a television director. Enid Lamont McLaglen died in 1942 as a result of a horse-riding accident.

His second marriage was to Suzanne M. Brueggeman. That marriage lasted from 1943 until 1948. His third and final marriage was to Margaret Pumphrey, a Seattle socialite he married in 1948. They remained married until his death of a heart attack in 1959.

He had by that time become a naturalized U.S. citizen. His cremated remains are interred at Forest Lawn Memorial Park, Glendale in the Garden of Memory, Columbarium of Eternal Light.

On 8 February 1960, McLaglen received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame at 1735 Vine Street, for his contributions to the motion picture industry.




</doc>
<doc id="161266" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=161266" title="Robert Duvall">
Robert Duvall

Robert Selden Duvall (; born January 5, 1931) is an American actor and filmmaker. He has been nominated for seven Academy Awards (winning for his performance in "Tender Mercies"), seven Golden Globes (winning four), and has multiple nominations and one win each of the BAFTA, Screen Actors Guild Award, and Emmy Award. He received the National Medal of Arts in 2005. Duvall has starred in numerous films and television series, including "To Kill a Mockingbird" (1962), "The Twilight Zone" (1963), "The Outer Limits" (1964), "Bullitt" (1968), "True Grit" (1969), "MASH" (1970), "THX 1138" (1971), "Joe Kidd" (1972), "The Godfather" (1972), "The Godfather Part II" (1974), "The Conversation" (1974), "Network" (1976), "Apocalypse Now" (1979), "The Great Santini" (1979), "Lonesome Dove" (1989), "The Handmaid's Tale" (1990), "Rambling Rose" (1991), and "Falling Down" (1993).

Duvall began appearing in theatre during the late 1950s, moving into television and film roles during the early 1960s, playing Boo Radley in "To Kill a Mockingbird" (1962) and appearing in "Captain Newman, M.D." (1963). He landed many of his most famous roles during the early 1970s, such as Major Frank Burns in the blockbuster comedy "MASH" (1970) and the lead role in "THX 1138" (1971), as well as Horton Foote's adaptation of William Faulkner's "Tomorrow" (1972), which was developed at The Actors Studio and is Duvall's personal favorite. This was followed by a series of critically lauded performances in commercially successful films.

Since then, Duvall has continued to act in both film and television with such productions as "Tender Mercies" (1983), "The Natural" (1984), "Colors" (1988), the television mini-series "Lonesome Dove" (1989), "Stalin" (1992), "The Man Who Captured Eichmann" (1996), "Phenomenon" (1996), "A Family Thing" (1996), "The Apostle" (1997), "A Civil Action" (1998), "Deep Impact" (1998), "Open Range" (2003), "Gods and Generals" (2003), "Secondhand Lions" (2003), "Broken Trail" (2006), "Get Low" (2010), "Jack Reacher" (2012), "A Night in Old Mexico" (2014), "The Judge" (2014), and "Wild Horses" (2015).

Duvall was born January 5, 1931, in San Diego, California, the son of Mildred Virginia (; 1901–c. 1985), an amateur actress, and William Howard Duvall (1904–1984), a Virginia-born U.S. Navy admiral. He has English, and smaller amounts of Belgian, French Huguenot, German, Scottish, Swiss-German, and Welsh ancestry. His mother was a relative of American Civil War General Robert E. Lee, and a member of the Lee Family of Virginia, while his father was a descendant of settler Mareen Duvall. Duvall was raised in the Christian Science religion and has stated that, while it is his belief, he does not attend church. He grew up primarily in Annapolis, Maryland, site of the United States Naval Academy. He recalled: "I was a Navy brat. My father started at the Academy when he was 16, made captain at 39 and retired as a rear admiral." He attended Severn School in Severna Park, Maryland, and The Principia in St. Louis, Missouri. He graduated, in 1953, from Principia College in Elsah, Illinois, with a Bachelor of Arts degree in Drama.

Duvall served in the United States Army for a brief period shortly after the Korean War (from August 19, 1953, to August 20, 1954) leaving the Army as private first class. "That's led to some confusion in the press," he explained in 1984, "Some stories have me shooting it out with the Commies from a foxhole over in Frozen Chosin. Pork Chop Hill stuff. Hell, I barely qualified with the M-1 rifle in basic training". While stationed at Camp Gordon (later renamed Fort Gordon) in Georgia, Duvall acted in an amateur production of the comedy "Room Service" in nearby Augusta, Georgia.

In the winter of 1955, Duvall began studies at the Neighborhood Playhouse School of the Theatre in New York City, under Sanford Meisner, on the G.I. Bill. He was there for two years. Dustin Hoffman, Gene Hackman, and James Caan were among his classmates. He was there in 1957 attending Meisner's classes. While studying acting, he worked as a Manhattan post office clerk. Duvall remains friends today with fellow California-born actors Hoffman and Hackman, who he knew during their years as struggling actors. In 1955, Duvall roomed with Hoffman in a New York City apartment while they were studying together at the Playhouse. Around this time, he also roomed with Hackman, while working odd jobs such as clerking at Macy's, sorting mail at the post office, and driving a truck. The three roommates have since earned, among themselves, 19 Academy Award nominations, with five wins.

Duvall began his professional acting career with the Gateway Playhouse, an Equity summer theatre based in Bellport, Long Island, New York. Arguably his stage debut was in its 1952 season when he played the Pilot in "Laughter In The Stars", an adaptation of "The Little Prince", at what was then the Gateway Theatre.

After a year's absence when he was with the U.S. Army (1953–1954), he returned to Gateway in its 1955 summer season, playing: Eddie Davis in Ronald Alexander's "Time Out For Ginger" (July 1955), Hal Carter in William Inge's "Picnic" (July 1955), Charles Wilder in John Willard's "The Cat And The Canary" (August 1955), Paris in Arthur Miller's "The Crucible" (August 1955), and John the Witchboy in William Berney and Howard Richardson's "Dark of the Moon" (September 1955). The playbill of "Dark of the Moon" indicated that he had portrayed the Witchboy before and that he will "repeat his famous portrayal" of this character for the 1955 season's revival of this play. For Gateway's 1956 season (his third season with the Gateway Players), he played the role of Max Halliday in Frederick Knott's "Dial M for Murder" (July 1956), Virgil Blessing in Inge's "Bus Stop" (August 1956), and Clive Mortimer in John van Druten's "I Am a Camera" (August 1956). The playbills for the 1956 season described him as "an audience favorite" in the last season and as having "appeared at the Neighborhood Playhouse in New York and studied acting with Sandy Meisner this past winter."

In its 1957 season, he appeared as Mr. Mayher in Agatha Christie's "Witness For The Prosecution" (July 1957), as Hector in Jean Anouilh's "Thieves' Carnivall" (July 1957), and the role which he once described as the "catalyst of his career": Eddie Carbone in Arthur Miller's "A View from the Bridge" (from July 30 to August 3, 1957, and directed by Ulu Grosbard, who was by then a regular director at the Gateway Theatre). Miller himself attended one of Duvall's performances as Eddie and also during this performance he met important people that allowed him to, in two months, land a "spectacular lead" in the "Naked City" television series.

While appearing at the Gateway Theatre in the second half of the 1950s, he was also appearing at the Augusta Civic Theatre, the McLean Theatre in Virginia and the Arena Theatre in Washington, DC. The 1957 playbills also described him as "a graduate of the Neighborhood Playhouse" (so he must have completed his studies there by the summer of 1957), "a member of Sanford Meisner's professional workshop" and as having worked with Alvin Epstein, a mime and a member of Marcel Marceau's company. By this time, also (July 1957), his theatrical credits included performances as Jimmy in "The Rainmaker" and as Harvey Weems in Horton Foote's "The Midnight Caller". Already receiving top-billing at the Gateway Playhouse, in the 1959 season, he appeared in lead roles as Stanley Kowalski in Tennessee Williams' "A Streetcar Named Desire" (July–August 1959), Maxwell Archer in "Once More with Feeling", Igor Romanoff in Peter Ustinov's "Romanoff and Juliet", and Joe Mancuso in Kyle Crichton's "The Happiest Millionaire" (all in August 1959).

At the Neighborhood Playhouse, Meisner cast him in Tennessee Williams' "Camino Real" and the title role of Harvey Weems in Foote's one-act play "The Midnight Caller". The latter was already part of Duvall's performance credits by mid-July 1957.

He made his off-Broadway debut at the Gate Theater as Frank Gardner in George Bernard Shaw's "Mrs. Warren's Profession" on June 25, 1958. This play closed three days later (June 28) after five performances. His other early off-Broadway credits include the role of Doug in the premiere of Michael Shurtleff's "Call Me By My Rightful Name" on January 31, 1961, at One Sheridan Square and the role of Bob Smith in the premiere of William Snyder's "The Days and Nights of BeeBee Fenstermaker" on September 17, 1962, until June 9, 1963, at the Sheridan Square Playhouse. His most notable off-Broadway performance, for which he won an Obie Award in 1965 and which he considers his "Othello", was as Eddie Carbone (again) in Miller's "A View From the Bridge" at the Sheridan Square Playhouse from January 28, 1965, to December 11, 1966. It was directed again by Ulu Grosbard with Dustin Hoffman. On February 2, 1966, he made his Broadway debut as Harry Roat, Jr in Frederick Knott's "Wait Until Dark" at the Ethel Barrymore Theatre. This played at the Shubert Theatre and George Abbott Theatre and closed on December 31, 1966, at the Music Box Theatre. His other Broadway performance was as Walter Cole in David Mamet's "American Buffalo", which opened at the Ethel Barrymore Theatre on February 16, 1977, and closed at the Belasco Theatre on June 11, 1977.

In 1959, Duvall made his first television appearance on "Armstrong Circle Theater" in the episode "The Jailbreak". He appeared regularly on television as a guest actor during the 1960s, often in action, suspense, detective, or crime dramas. His appearances during this time include performances on "Alfred Hitchcock Presents", "Naked City", "The Untouchables", "Route 66", "The Twilight Zone", "The Outer Limits", "The Fugitive", "T.H.E. Cat", "Voyage to the Bottom of the Sea", "The Time Tunnel", and "The Mod Squad".

Duvall's screen debut was as Boo Radley in the critically acclaimed "To Kill a Mockingbird" (1962). He was cast in the film on the recommendation of screenwriter Horton Foote, who met Duvall at Neighborhood Playhouse during a 1957 production of Foote's play, "The Midnight Caller". Foote, who collaborated with Duvall many more times over the course of their careers, said he believed Duvall had a particular love of common people and ability to infuse fascinating revelations into his roles. Foote has described Duvall as "our number one actor."

After "To Kill a Mockingbird", Duvall appeared in a number of films during the 1960s, mostly in midsized parts, but also in a few larger supporting roles. Some of his more notable appearances include the role of Capt. Paul Cabot Winston in "Captain Newman, M.D." (1963), Chiz in "Countdown" (1968), and Gordon in "The Rain People". Duvall had a small part as a cab driver who ferries McQueen around just before the chase scene in the film "Bullitt" (1968). He was the notorious malefactor "Lucky" Ned Pepper in "True Grit" (1969), in which he engaged in a climactic shootout with John Wayne's Rooster Cogburn on horseback.

Duvall became an important presence in American films beginning in the 1970s. He drew a considerable amount of attention in 1970 for his portrayal of the dastardly Major Frank Burns in the film "MASH" and for his portrayal of the title role in "THX 1138" in 1971. His first major critical success came portraying Tom Hagen in "The Godfather" (1972) and "The Godfather Part II" (1974), the 1972 film earning him an Academy Award nomination for Best Supporting Actor. In 1976, Duvall played supporting roles in "The Eagle Has Landed" and as Dr. Watson in "The Seven-Per-Cent Solution" opposite Nicol Williamson, Alan Arkin, Vanessa Redgrave, and Laurence Olivier.

Duvall received another Oscar nomination for Best Supporting Actor and won both a BAFTA Award and Golden Globe Award for his role as Lt. Colonel Kilgore in "Apocalypse Now" (1979). His line "I love the smell of napalm in the morning" from "Apocalypse Now" is regarded as iconic in cinema history. The full text is:

Duvall received a BAFTA Award nomination for his portrayal of detestable television executive Frank Hackett in the critically acclaimed film "Network" (1976) and garnered an Oscar nomination for Best Actor in a Leading Role in "The Great Santini" (1979) as the hard-boiled Marine Lt. Col. "Bull" Meechum. The latter role was based on a Marine aviator, Colonel Donald Conroy, the father of the book's author Pat Conroy. He also co-starred with Laurence Olivier and Tommy Lee Jones in "The Betsy" (1978) and portrayed United States President Dwight D. Eisenhower in the television miniseries "Ike" (1979).

In 1977, Duvall returned to Broadway to appear as Walter Cole in David Mamet's "American Buffalo". For his performance, he received a Drama Desk Award nomination for Outstanding Actor in a Play.
Duvall continued to appear in films during the 1980s, including the roles of cynical sportswriter Max Mercy in "The Natural" (1984) and Los Angeles police officer Bob Hodges in "Colors" (1988). He won an Oscar for Best Actor as country western singer Mac Sledge in "Tender Mercies" (1983). Duvall was said to have written the music, but the actor said he wrote only a few "background, secondary songs." Duvall did do his own singing, insisting it be added to his contract that he sing the songs himself; Duvall said, "What's the point if you're not going to do your own [singing]? They're just going to dub somebody else? I mean, there's no point to that."

Actress Tess Harper, who co-starred, said Duvall inhabited the character so fully that she only got to know Mac Sledge and not Duvall himself. Director Bruce Beresford, too, said the transformation was so believable to him that he could feel his skin crawling up the back of his neck the first day of filming with Duvall. Beresford said of the actor, "Duvall has the ability to completely inhabit the person he's acting. He totally and utterly becomes that person to a degree which is uncanny." Nevertheless, Duvall and Beresford did not get along well during the production and often clashed during filming, including one day in which Beresford walked off the set in frustration.

In 1989, Duvall appeared in the miniseries "Lonesome Dove" in the role of Captain Augustus "Gus" McCrae, Texas Rangers (retired). He has considered this particular role to be his personal favorite. He won a Golden Globe Award and earned an Emmy Award nomination. For his role as a former Texas Ranger peace officer, Duvall was trained in the use of Walker revolvers by the Texas marksman Joe Bowman.

Duvall has maintained a busy film career, sometimes appearing in as many as four in one year. He received Oscar nominations for his portrayals of evangelical preacher Euliss "Sonny" Dewey in "The Apostle" (1997) — a film he also wrote and directed — and played lawyer Jerome Facher in "A Civil Action" (1998).

He directed "Assassination Tango" (2002), a thriller about one of his favorite hobbies, tango. He portrayed General Robert E. Lee in "Gods and Generals" in 2003.

Other roles during this period that displayed the actor's wide range included that of a crew chief in "Days of Thunder" (1990), a retiring cop in "Falling Down" (1993), a Hispanic barber in "Wrestling Ernest Hemingway" (1993), a New York tabloid editor in "The Paper" (1994), a rural doctor in "Phenomenon" (1996), a father who owns a jumper horse farm in "Something to Talk About" (1995), an abusive father in 1996's "Slingblade", an astronaut in "Deep Impact" (1998), a mechanic in "Gone in 60 Seconds" (2000), a soccer coach in "A Shot at Glory" (2001), a police officer in "John Q" (2002), a trail boss in "Open Range" (2003), another soccer coach in the comedy "Kicking & Screaming", an old free spirit in "Secondhand Lions" (2003), a Las Vegas poker champion in "Lucky You", and a New York police chief in "We Own the Night" (both 2007).

He has his own star on the St. Louis Walk of Fame.

Duvall has periodically worked in television from the 1990s on. He won a Golden Globe Award and garnered an Emmy nomination for his portrayal of a brutal and corrupt communist leader Joseph Stalin in the 1992 television film "Stalin". He was nominated for an Emmy again in 1997 for portraying Adolf Eichmann in "The Man Who Captured Eichmann". In 2006, he won an Emmy for the role of Prentice "Print" Ritter in the revisionist Western miniseries "Broken Trail".

In 2005, Duvall was awarded a National Medal of Arts by President George W. Bush at the White House. In 2014, he starred in "The Judge" alongside Robert Downey Jr.. While the movie itself received mixed reviews, Robert Duvall's performance was praised. He has been nominated for a Golden Globe, Screen Actors Guild, and Academy Award for his supporting role.

In 2015, at age 84, Duvall became the oldest person ever to be nominated for Best Supporting Actor at the Academy Awards, with a nomination for the film "The Judge."

Duvall has been married four times but does not have any children. He met his first wife, Barbara Benjamin, a former dancer on "The Jackie Gleason Show", during the shooting of "To Kill a Mockingbird". She had two daughters from her first marriage. The couple were married from 1964 until 1975. His second wife was Gail Youngs, to whom he was married from 1982 to 1986. His marriage to Youngs temporarily made him the brother-in-law of John Savage, Robin Young, and Jim Youngs. His third marriage was to Sharon Brophy, a dancer, from 1991 to 1995.

In 2005, Duvall married his fourth wife, Luciana Pedraza, granddaughter of Argentine aviator pioneer Susana Ferrari Billinghurst. He met Pedraza in Argentina, recalling, "The flower shop was closed, so I went to the bakery. If the flower shop had been open, I never would've met her." They were both born on January 5, but Duvall is 41 years older. They have been together since 1997. He produced, directed, and acted with her in "Assassination Tango", with the majority of filming in Buenos Aires. Duvall is also known as a very skilled Argentine Tango dancer, having a Tango Studio in Argentina and in the United States.
Duvall's political views are variously described as libertarian or conservative. He was personally invited to Republican President George W. Bush's inauguration in 2001. In September 2007, he announced his support for Republican Presidential candidate Rudy Giuliani. Duvall worked the floor at the GOP's 2008 national convention and, according to an August 29, 2008, MSNBC article, Duvall narrated most of the videos for the convention. In September 2008, he appeared onstage at a John McCain-Sarah Palin rally in New Mexico.

Duvall endorsed Republican presidential nominee Mitt Romney in 2012. He revealed during a March 13, 2014, interview with "The Daily Beast" however that he will probably vote independent, calling today's Republican Party "a mess."

In 2001, Pedraza and Duvall founded the Robert Duvall Children's Fund to assist families in Northern Argentina through renovations of homes, schools, and medical facilities. Duvall and Pedraza have been active supporters of Pro Mujer, a nonprofit charity organization dedicated to helping Latin America's poorest women (with Duvall and Pedraza concentrating on Pedraza's home in the Argentine Northwest).

In May 2009, Duvall spoke for historic preservation against Walmart's proposal to build a store across the road from the entrance to the Wilderness Battlefield national park in Orange County, Virginia. In 2011, he appeared at the Texas Children's Cancer Center charity event "An Evening with a Texas Legend" in Houston, where he was interviewed by Bob Schieffer.



</doc>
<doc id="200750" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=200750" title="Adrien Brody">
Adrien Brody

Adrien Brody (born April 14, 1973) is an American actor and producer. He received widespread recognition and acclaim after starring in Roman Polanski's "The Pianist" (2002), for which he won the Academy Award for Best Actor at age 29, making him the youngest actor to win in that category. Brody is also the only male American actor to receive the César Award for Best Actor.

Other successful films that Brody has starred in are "The Thin Red Line" (1998), "The Village" (2004), "King Kong" (2005), and "Predators" (2010).

He is a frequent collaborator of Wes Anderson's, and has starred in three of Anderson's films, those being "The Darjeeling Limited" (2007), "Fantastic Mr. Fox" (2009), and "The Grand Budapest Hotel" (2014).

In 2017, he appeared in the fourth series of the BBC historical drama "Peaky Blinders".

Brody was born in Woodhaven, Queens, New York, the son of Sylvia Plachy, a photographer, and Elliot Brody, a retired history professor and painter. Brody's father is of Polish Jewish descent; Brody's mother, who was raised as a Catholic, was born in Budapest, Hungary, and is the daughter of a Catholic Hungarian aristocrat father and a Czech Jewish mother. Brody was raised "without a strong connection" to Judaism or Catholicism.

As a child, Brody performed magic shows at children's birthday parties as "The Amazing Adrien". He attended the I.S. 227 Louis Armstrong Middle School and New York's Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music & Art and Performing Arts. His parents enrolled him in acting classes to distance him from the dangerous children with whom he associated. He attended summer camp at Long Lake Camp for the Arts in the Adirondacks in upstate New York. Brody attended Stony Brook University before transferring to Queens College for a semester.

Taking acting classes as a child, by age thirteen, he appeared in an Off-Broadway play and a PBS television film. After appearing in "Bullet" in 1996 with Tupac Shakur and Mickey Rourke, Brody hovered on the brink of stardom, receiving an Independent Spirit Award nomination for his role in the 1998 film "Restaurant", and later praise for his roles in Spike Lee's "Summer of Sam" and Terrence Malick's "The Thin Red Line". He received widespread recognition when he was cast as the lead in Roman Polanski's "The Pianist" (2002). To prepare for the role, Brody withdrew for months, gave up his apartment and his car, broke up with his then-girlfriend, learned how to play Chopin on the piano, and lost 29 lbs (13 kg). The role won him an Academy Award for Best Actor, making him, at 29, the youngest actor ever to win the award, and to date the only winner under the age of 30. He also won a César Award for his performance.

Brody appeared on "Saturday Night Live" on May 10, 2003, his first TV work, controversially giving an improvised introduction, while wearing faux dreadlocks for Jamaican reggae musical guest Sean Paul. Other TV appearances include NBC's "The Today Show", and on MTV's "Punk'd" after being tricked by Ashton Kutcher.

After "The Pianist", Brody appeared in four very different films. In "Dummy" (released in 2003, but originally shot in 2000, just prior to his work in "The Pianist"), he portrayed Steven Schoichet, a socially awkward aspiring ventriloquist in pursuit of a love interest (his employment counsellor). He learned ventriloquism and puppetry for the role (under the tutelage of actor/ventriloquist Alan Semok) convincingly enough to perform all of the voice stunts and puppet manipulation live on set in real time, with no subsequent post dubbing. He played Noah Percy, a mentally disabled young man, in the film "The Village", by M. Night Shyamalan, shell-shocked war veteran Jack Starks in "The Jacket", writer Jack Driscoll in the 2005 "King Kong" remake, and father-to-be Peter Whitman in "The Darjeeling Limited" by Wes Anderson. "King Kong" was both a critical and box office success - it grossed $550 million worldwide, and is Brody's most successful film to date in monetary terms. Additionally, Brody played a detective in "Hollywoodland". He has also appeared in Diet Coke and Schweppes commercials, as well as Tori Amos' music video for "A Sorta Fairytale".

On January 5, 2006, Brody confirmed speculation that he was interested in playing the role of The Joker in 2008's "The Dark Knight". However, Christopher Nolan and Warner Bros. decided instead to cast Heath Ledger in the role. He was also in talks with Paramount to play Spock in J. J. Abrams "Star Trek XI", but it ultimately went to Zachary Quinto. In 2009, he starred in "Splice", a science fiction film written and directed by Vincenzo Natali. Originally a Sundance film, "Splice" was adopted by Dark Castle Entertainment and distributed by Warner Bros. Most recently, he played the star role of Royce in "Predators" (a sequel to the original "Predator"), directed by Nimród Antal and produced by Robert Rodriguez.

In 2011, Brody starred in a Stella Artois beer ad called "Crying Jean" that premiered right after half-time of the Super Bowl XLV as part of Stella's "She Is a Thing of Beauty" campaign. He appeared in Woody Allen's 2011 Academy Award-winning comedy "Midnight in Paris" as Salvador Dalí. On January 16, 2012, Brody made his debut as a runway model for Prada Men Fall/Winter 2012 show.

In 2014, Brody collaborated again with Wes Anderson in the Academy Award-winning "The Grand Budapest Hotel", where he played Dmitri. The following year, he starred as Tiberius in the Chinese film "Dragon Blade", which grossed $54.8 million in its opening week in China.

In 2017, it was announced he would join the cast of the fourth season of the BBC crime drama "Peaky Blinders".

On August 4, 2017, he received the Leopard Club Award at the Locarno Festival. The Leopard Club Award pays homage to a major film personality whose work has made a lasting impact on the collective imagination.

In 1992, Brody was seriously hurt in a motorcycle accident in which he flew over a car and crashed head-first into a crosswalk. He spent months recuperating. He has broken his nose three times doing stunts; the most recent was during the filming of "Summer of Sam".

Brody began dating Spanish actress Elsa Pataky in 2006. For Pataky's 31st birthday in July 2007, Brody purchased her a 19th-century farm in Central New York state that was remodeled to look like a castle. Brody and Pataky were featured at their New York home in a 35-page spread for "HELLO!" magazine in October 2008. The pair broke up in 2009. Brody has been dating model Lara Lieto since 2013.

In 2010, Brody sued the "Giallo" filmmakers, alleging that they failed to pay his full salary.



</doc>
<doc id="170409" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=170409" title="Colin Firth">
Colin Firth

Colin Andrew Firth, (born 10 September 1960), is an English actor with Italian citizenship who has received an Academy Award, a Golden Globe Award, two BAFTA Awards, and three Screen Actors Guild Awards, as well as the Volpi Cup. Firth's highly-acclaimed role, earning him an Academy Award for Best Actor, was his portrayal of King George VI in Tom Hooper’s "The King's Speech" (2010).

Identified in the late 1980s with the "Brit Pack" of rising, young British actors, it was not until his portrayal of Fitzwilliam Darcy in the 1995 television adaptation of Jane Austen's "Pride and Prejudice" that he received more widespread attention. This led to roles in films such as "The English Patient", "Bridget Jones's Diary," for which he was nominated for a BAFTA Award, "Shakespeare in Love", and "Love Actually". In 2009, Firth received widespread critical acclaim for his leading role in "A Single Man", for which he gained his first Academy Award nomination, and won a BAFTA Award.

His films have grossed more than $3 billion from 42 releases worldwide. In 2011, Firth received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame, and was also selected as one of the "Time 100". He was awarded an honorary degree from the University of Winchester in 2007, and was made a Freeman of the City of London in 2012. He has campaigned for the rights of indigenous tribal people, and is a member of Survival International. Firth has campaigned on issues of asylum seekers, refugees' rights, and the environment. He commissioned and co-authored a scientific paper on a study into the differences in brain structure between people of differing political orientations.

Firth was born in the village of Grayshott, Hampshire, to parents who were both academics and teachers. His mother, Shirley Jean ("née" Rolles), was a comparative religion lecturer at King Alfred's College (now the University of Winchester), and his father, David Norman Lewis Firth, was a history lecturer at King Alfred's and education officer for the Nigerian Government. Firth is the eldest of three children; he has a sister, Kate, an actress and voice coach, and a brother, Jonathan, an actor. His maternal grandparents were Congregationalist ministers and his paternal grandfather was an Anglican priest; they performed overseas missionary work and both of his parents spent time in India.

As a child, Firth frequently travelled due to his parents' work, spending some years in Nigeria. He also lived in St. Louis, Missouri, when he was 11, which he has described as "a difficult time". On returning to England, he attended the Montgomery of Alamein Secondary School (now Kings' School), which at the time was a state comprehensive school in Winchester, Hampshire. He was still an outsider and was the target of bullying. To counter this, he adopted the local working class Hampshire accent and copied his schoolmates' lack of interest in schoolwork.

By the time he was 14, Firth had already decided to be a professional actor, having attended drama workshops from the age of 10. Until further education, he was not academically inclined, later saying in an interview, "I didn't like school. I just thought it was boring and mediocre and nothing they taught me seemed to be of any interest at all." However, at Barton Peveril Sixth Form College in Eastleigh, he was imbued with a love of English literature by an enthusiastic teacher, Penny Edwards, and has said that his two years at Barton Peveril were "among the two happiest years of my life".

After his sixth form years, Firth moved to London and joined the National Youth Theatre. There, he made many contacts in the acting world, from which he got a job in the wardrobe department at the National Theatre. From there, he went on to study at Drama Centre London.

Playing Hamlet in the Drama Centre end of year production, Firth was spotted by playwright Julian Mitchell, who cast him as the gay, ambitious public schoolboy Guy Bennett in the 1983 West End production of "Another Country". In 1984, Firth made his film debut in the role of Tommy Judd, Guy Bennett's straight, Marxist school friend in the screen adaptation of the play (opposite Rupert Everett as Guy Bennett). This was the start of longstanding public feud between Firth and Everett, which was later resolved. He starred with Sir Laurence Olivier in "Lost Empires" (1986), a TV adaptation of J. B. Priestley's novel.

In 1987, Firth along with other up and coming British actors such as Tim Roth, Bruce Payne and Paul McGann were dubbed the 'Brit Pack'. That same year, he appeared alongside Kenneth Branagh in the film version of J. L. Carr's "A Month in the Country". Sheila Johnston observed a theme in his early works of playing those traumatised by war. Firth portrayed real-life British soldier Robert Lawrence MC in the 1988 BBC dramatisation "Tumbledown". Lawrence was severely injured at the Battle of Mount Tumbledown during the Falklands War, and the film details his struggles to adjust to his disability whilst confronted with indifference from the government and the public. The film attracted controversy at the time, with criticism coming from left and right ends of the political spectrum. Firth's performance led to a Royal TV Society Best Actor Award and he was nominated for the 1989 BAFTA Television Award. In 1989, he played the title role in Miloš Forman's "Valmont", based on "Les Liaisons dangereuses". This was released just a year after "Dangerous Liaisons" and did not make a big impact in comparison. The same year, he played a paranoid, socially awkward character in Argentinian psychological thriller "Apartment Zero".

It was through his role as the aloof and haughty aristocrat Mr. Darcy in the 1995 BBC television adaptation of Jane Austen's "Pride and Prejudice" that Firth finally became a household name. He was producer Sue Birtwistle's first choice for the part, eventually being persuaded to take it, despite initial reluctance as he was unfamiliar with Austen's writing. Firth and co-star Jennifer Ehle began a romantic relationship during the filming of the series, which only received media attention after the couple's separation. Sheila Johnston wrote that Firth's approach to the part "lent Darcy complex shades of coldness, even caddishness, in the early episodes." The serial was a major international success, and unexpectedly elevated Firth to stardom, in some part due to an iconic scene in which he emerged in a wet shirt after swimming. Although Firth did not mind being recognised as "a romantic idol as a Darcy with smouldering sex appeal" in a role that "officially turned him into a heart-throb", he expressed the wish not to be associated with "Pride and Prejudice" forever. He was, therefore, reluctant to accept similar roles and risk becoming typecast. For a time, it did seem as if Mr. Darcy would overshadow the rest of his career, and there were humorous allusions to the role in his next five movies. The most notable of these was the casting of Firth as love interest Mark Darcy in the film adaptation of "Bridget Jones's Diary", itself a modern-day retelling of "Pride and Prejudice". Firth accepted the part as he saw it as an opportunity to lampoon his Mr. Darcy character. The film was very successful and critically well-liked. A in 2004 was mostly panned by critics but was still financially successful. Firth had a supporting role in "The English Patient" (1996) playing the husband of Kristin Scott Thomas's character, whose jealousy about her adultery leads to both their deaths. He had parts in light romantic period pieces such as "Shakespeare in Love" (1998), "Relative Values" (2000), and "The Importance of Being Earnest" (2002). He appeared in several television productions, including "Donovan Quick" (an updated version of "Don Quixote") (1999) and had a more serious and villainous role as Dr. Wilhelm Stuckart in "Conspiracy" (2001), concerning the Nazi Wannsee Conference; Firth was nominated for a Primetime Emmy Award for his role.

Firth featured in the ensemble all-star cast of Richard Curtis' "Love Actually" (2003), another financial success, which divided critics. In contrast that year, Firth was also given solo billing as the romantic lead in "Hope Springs", but the film received very poor reviews and made little impact at the box office. Firth played the painter Johannes Vermeer opposite Scarlett Johansson in the 2003 release "Girl with a Pearl Earring". Some critics praised the film's gentle subtlety and sumptuous visuals, whilst others found it almost too restrained, tedious and bereft of emotion. Nevertheless, the film had mostly favourable reviews, was moderately successful with audiences and gained several awards and nominations. 2005's "Nanny McPhee" with Emma Thompson was a rare venture for Firth into the fantasy genre. "Where the Truth Lies" from that year was also a departure from light comedies, this time a return to some of Firth's darker, more intense early roles, with a notorious scene featuring him involved in a bisexual orgy. Sheila Johnston wrote that it "confounded his fans" but despite that his character "draws knowingly on that suave, cultivated persona." which could be traced from Mr. Darcy. Other films from this time include "Then She Found Me" (2007) with Helen Hunt and "The Last Legion" (2007) with Aishwarya Rai. In 2008, he played the adult Blake Morrison reminiscing on his difficult relationship with his ailing father in the film adaptation of Morrison's memoir "And When Did You Last See Your Father?." The film received generally favourable reviews.Peter Bradshaw of "The Guardian" rated the film four out of five stars. Manohla Dargis in "The New York Times" said: "It's a pleasure to watch Mr. Firth – a supremely controlled actor who makes each developing fissure visible – show the adult Blake coming to terms with his contradictory feelings, letting the love and the hurt pour out of him."Philip French of "The Observer" wrote that Firth "[does] quiet agonising to perfection." However, Derek Elley of "Variety" called the film "an unashamed tearjerker that's all wrapping and no center." While he conceded that it was "undeniably effective at a gut level despite its dramatic shortcomings," he added that "Things aren't helped any by Firth's dour perf, as his Blake comes across as a self-centered whiner, a latter-day Me Generation figure who's obsessed with finding problems when there really aren't any."
In 2009, he featured in "A Christmas Carol", an adaptation of Charles Dickens's novel, using the performance capture procedure, playing Scrooge's optimistic nephew Fred.

At the 66th Venice International Film Festival in 2009, Firth was awarded the Volpi Cup for Best Actor for his role in Tom Ford's directorial debut "A Single Man" as a college professor grappling with solitude after the death of his longtime partner. His performance earned Firth career best reviews and Academy Award, Golden Globe, Screen Actors' Guild, BAFTA, and BFCA nominations; he won the BAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Leading Role in February 2010.

Firth starred in the 2010 film "The King's Speech" as Prince Albert, Duke of York/King George VI. The film details his working to overcome his speech impediment while becoming monarch of the United Kingdom at the end of 1936. At the Toronto International Film Festival (TIFF), the film was met with a standing ovation. The TIFF release of "The King's Speech" fell on Colin's 50th birthday and was called the "best 50th birthday gift". On 16 January 2011, he won a Golden Globe for his performance in "The King's Speech" in the category of Best Performance by an Actor in a Motion Picture – Drama. The Screen Actors Guild recognised Firth with the award for Best Male Actor for "The King's Speech" on 30 January 2011.
In February 2011, he won the best actor award at the 2011 BAFTA awards. He received an Academy Award for Best Actor in a motion picture for "The King's Speech" on 27 February 2011. It went on to gross $414,211,549 worldwide.

Firth appeared as senior British secret agent Bill Haydon in the 2011 adaptation of the John le Carré novel "Tinker Tailor Soldier Spy", directed by Tomas Alfredson, also starring Gary Oldman and Tom Hardy. The film gathered mostly excellent reviews. "The Independent" described Firth's performance as "suavely arrogant" and praised the film. Deborah Young in "The Hollywood Reporter" thought Firth got "all the best dialogue", which he delivered "sardonically". Leslie Felperin in "Variety" wrote that all the actors brought their "A game" and Firth was in "particularly choleric, amusing form." However, Peter Hitchens writing in the "Daily Mail" expressed reservations that Firth looked too young for the part (even though he technically was) being "of the post-war generation, who escaped wartime privation," and, therefore, not "old enough or ravaged enough".

In May 2011, Firth began filming "Gambit" – a remake of a 1960s crime caper, taking a part played in the original by Michael Caine. It was released in the UK in November 2012 and was a financial and critical failure, attracting many negative reviews. Empire's Kim Newman wrote, "Firth starts out homaging Caine with his horn-rimmed cool but soon defaults to his usual repressed British clod mode", whilst Time Out London called his a "likeable performance", although criticised the film overall. Stephen Dalton writing in "The Hollywood Reporter" said "To his credit, Firth keeps his performance grounded in downbeat realism while all around are wildly mugging in desperate pursuit of thin, forced laughs. He will appear in Rupert Everett's directorial debut "The Happy Prince", an Oscar Wilde biopic. Firth will play Wilde's friend Reginald "Reggie" Turner. Shooting began in September 2016. Firth was also expected to return for the third Bridget Jones film, which was in production in 2012.

In May 2013, it was announced that Firth had signed to co-star with Emma Stone in Woody Allen's romantic comedy "Magic in the Moonlight", set in the 1920s, shot on the French Riviera.

In 2015, Firth starred as Harry Hart in the spy action film "" which was a commercial success and received generally positive reviews. "Kingsman: The Secret Service" earned a gross of $414.4 million, against a budget of $81 million.

In June 2015, he was reported to be filming the story of Donald Crowhurst in "The Mercy", in which he stars as the yachtsman alongside Rachel Weisz, David Thewlis, and Jonathan Bailey.

In 2016, Firth reprised his popular role as Mark Darcy in "Bridget Jones's Baby", which fared much better with audiences and critics than the second in the series ("Bridget Jones: Edge of Reason"). Also in 2016, Firth portrayed American editor Max Perkins in the critically acclaimed "Genius" alongside Jude Law as author Thomas Wolfe. The film, which is based on A. Scott Berg's biography "Max Perkins: Editor of Genius".

In 2017, he reprised his role as Jamie from 2003's "Love Actually" in the television short film "Red Nose Day Actually", by original writer and director Richard Curtis. Also that year, Firth returned as Harry Hart in the sequel "".

Firth will play British naval commander David Russell in Thomas Vinterberg's "Kursk", a film about the true story of the 2000 Kursk submarine disaster in which he stars alongside Matthias Schoenaerts. Filming began in April 2017. He will be appearing as William Weatherall Wilkins, president of the Fidelity Fiduciary Bank, in the 2018 film "Mary Poppins Returns", and will once again portray Harry Bright in the sequel to "Mamma Mia!", "Mamma Mia! Here We Go Again".

Firth's first published work, "The Department of Nothing", appeared in "Speaking with the Angel" (2000). This collection of short stories was edited by Nick Hornby and was published to benefit the TreeHouse Trust, in aid of autistic children. Firth had previously met Hornby during the filming of the original "Fever Pitch". Colin Firth contributed with his writing for the book, "We Are One: A Celebration of Tribal Peoples", released in 2009. The book explores the cultures of peoples around the world, portraying both their diversity and the threats that they face. It features contributions from many Western writers, such as Laurens van der Post, Noam Chomsky, Claude Lévi-Strauss, and also from indigenous people, such as Davi Kopenawa Yanomami and Roy Sesana. The royalties from the sale of this book go to the indigenous rights organisation, Survival International.

Firth was an executive producer for the film In Prison My Whole Life, featuring Noam Chomsky and Angela Davis. The film was selected to the 2007 London Film Festival and the 2008 Sundance Film Festival.

In December 2010, Firth was guest editor on BBC Radio 4's Today programme, during which he commissioned research to scan the brains of politicians to see if there were any differences depending on political leanings. He was then credited as one of four co-authors of an academic paper into human brains, the others being University College London researchers. The results of the study suggested that conservatives have greater amygdala volume and liberals have greater volume in their anterior cingulate cortex.

In 2012, Firth's audiobook recording of Graham Greene's "The End of the Affair" was released at Audible.com. The production was awarded Audiobook of the Year at the 2013 Audie Awards.

In 2012, he co-founded Raindog Films with British music industry executive and entrepreneur Ged Doherty. its first feature, "Eye in the Sky", was released theatrically in April 2016.

Firth has been a long-standing supporter of Survival International, a non-governmental organisation that defends the rights of tribal peoples. Speaking in 2001, he said, "My interest in tribal peoples goes back many years... and I have supported [Survival] ever since." In 2003, during the promotion of the film "Love Actually", he spoke in defence of the tribal people of Botswana, condemning the Botswana government's eviction of the Gana and Gwi people (San) from the Central Kalahari Game Reserve. He says of the San, "These people are not the remnants of a past era who need to be brought up to date. Those who are able to continue to live on the land that is rightfully theirs are facing the 21st century with a confidence that many of us in the so-called developed world can only envy." He has also backed a Survival International campaign to press the Brazilian government to take more decisive action in defence of the Awá-Guajá people, whose land and livelihood is critically threatened by the actions of loggers.

As a supporter of the Refugee Council, Firth was involved in a campaign to stop the deportation of a group of 42 Congolese asylum seekers, expressing concerns in open letters to "The Independent" and "The Guardian" that they faced being murdered on their return to the Democratic Republic of Congo. Firth said: "To me, it's just basic civilisation to help people. I find this incredibly painful to see how we dismiss the most desperate people in our society. It's easily done. It plays to the tabloids, to the Middle-England xenophobes. It just makes me furious. And all from a government we once had such high hopes for". Four of the asylum seekers were given a last-minute reprieve from deportation.

Firth, along with other celebrities, has been involved in the Oxfam global campaign Make Trade Fair, focusing on trade practices seen as especially unfair to third world producers including dumping, high import tariffs, and labour rights. He has further contributed to this cause by opening (with a few collaborators) an eco-friendly shop in West London, Eco. The shop offers fair trade and eco-friendly goods, as well as expert advice on making spaces more energy efficient. In October 2009, at the London Film Festival, Firth launched a film and political activism website, Brightwide (since decommissioned), along with his wife Livia.

During the 2010 general election, Firth announced his support for the Liberal Democrats, having previously been a Labour supporter, citing asylum and refugees' rights as a key reason for his change in affiliation. In December 2010, Firth publicly dropped his support of the Liberal Democrats, citing their U-turn on tuition fees as one of the key reasons for his disillusionment. He also said that while he no longer supports the Liberal Democrats, he is currently unaffiliated. Firth appeared in literature to support changing the British electoral system from first-past-the-post to alternative vote for electing members of parliament to the House of Commons in the unsuccessful Alternative Vote referendum in 2011.

In 2009, Firth joined the project, supporting the movement calling for people to reduce their carbon footprint. In 2010, Colin endorsed the "Roots & Shoots" education programme in the UK run by the Jane Goodall Institute (UK).

In 1989, Firth began a relationship with Meg Tilly, his co-star in "Valmont". They had a son, William Joseph "Will" Firth, in 1990. The family moved to the Lower Mainland of British Columbia, Canada. Firth's acting career slowed down until they broke up in 1994, and he returned to the UK. In 1997, Firth married Italian film producer and director Livia Giuggioli. They have two sons, Luca (born March 2001) and Matteo (born August 2003). The family now live in both Chiswick, London and Umbria, Italy. Firth started to learn Italian when he and Giuggioli began to date and is now fluent in the language.

Firth was awarded an honorary degree on 19 October 2007, from the University of Winchester. On 13 January 2011, he was presented with the 2,429th star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame. In April 2011, "Time" magazine included Firth in its list of the world's 100 Most Influential People. Firth was appointed Commander of the Order of the British Empire (CBE) in the 2011 Birthday Honours for services to drama, and made a Freeman of the City of London on 8 March 2012.

A vocal opponent of the United Kingdom leaving the European Union (Brexit), following the referendum result and ensuing uncertainty over rights of non EU citizens. Firth applied for "dual citizenship (British and Italian)" in 2017 in order to "have the same passports as his wife and children". The Italian interior ministry, Marco Minniti, announced his application had been approved on 22 September 2017.



Interviews

Further reading


</doc>
<doc id="161436" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=161436" title="Ernest Borgnine">
Ernest Borgnine

Ernest Borgnine (; born Ermes Effron Borgnino (); January 24, 1917 – July 8, 2012) was an American actor whose career spanned over six decades. He was noted for his gruff but calm voice, Machiavellian eyebrows, and gap-toothed Cheshire cat grin. A popular performer, he had also appeared as a guest on numerous talk shows and as a panelist on several game shows.

Borgnine's film career began in 1951, and included supporting roles in "China Corsair" (1951), "From Here to Eternity" (1953), "Vera Cruz" (1954), "Bad Day at Black Rock" (1955) and "The Wild Bunch" (1969). He also played the unconventional lead in many films, winning the Academy Award for Best Actor for "Marty" (1955). He achieved continuing success in the sitcom "McHale's Navy" (1962–1966), in which he played the title character, and co-starred as Dominic Santini in the action series "Airwolf" (1984–1986), in addition to a wide variety of other roles.

Borgnine earned his third Primetime Emmy Award nomination at age 92 for his work on the 2009 series finale of "ER". He was known as the original voice of Mermaid Man on "SpongeBob SquarePants" from 1999 until his death in 2012. He had earlier replaced the late Vic Tayback as the voice of the villainous Carface in both "All Dogs Go to Heaven 2" (1996) and "" (1996–1998).

Ernest Borgnine was born Ermes Effron Borgnino on January 24, 1917, in Hamden, Connecticut, the son of Italian immigrants. His mother, Anna ("née" Boselli; 1894– 1949), hailed from Carpi, near Modena, while his father Camillo Borgnino (1891–1975) was a native of Ottiglio near Alessandria. Borgnine's parents separated when he was two years old, and he then lived with his mother in Italy for about four and a half years. By 1923, his parents had reconciled, the family name was changed from Borgnino to Borgnine, and his father changed his first name to Charles. Borgnine had a younger sister, Evelyn Borgnine Velardi (1925–2013). The family settled in New Haven, Connecticut, where Borgnine graduated from James Hillhouse High School. He took to sports while growing up, but showed no interest in acting.

Borgnine joined the United States Navy in October 1935, after graduation from high school. He served aboard the destroyer/minesweeper (DD-119; AG-21 and DMS-2) and was honorably discharged from the Navy in October 1941. In January 1942, he reenlisted in the Navy after the attack on Pearl Harbor. During World War II, he patrolled the Atlantic Coast on an antisubmarine warfare ship, the USS "Sylph" (PY-12). In September 1945, he was honorably discharged from the Navy. He served a total of almost ten years in the Navy and obtained the grade of gunner's mate 1st class. His military awards include the Navy Good Conduct Medal, American Defense Service Medal with Fleet Clasp, American Campaign Medal with " bronze star, and the World War II Victory Medal.

In 1997, Borgnine received the United States Navy Memorial, Lone Sailor Award.

On December 7, 2000, Borgnine was named the Veterans Foundation's Veteran of the Year.

In October 2004, Borgnine received the honorary title of chief petty officer from Master Chief Petty Officer of the Navy Terry D. Scott. The ceremony for Borgnine's naval advancement was held at the U.S. Navy Memorial in Washington, D.C. He received the special honor for his naval service and support of the Navy and navy families worldwide.

On February 5, 2007, he received the California Commendation Medal.

Borgnine returned to his parents' house in Connecticut after his Navy discharge without a job to go back to and no direction. In a British Film Institute interview about his life and career, he said:

He took a local factory job, but was unwilling to settle down to that kind of work. His mother encouraged him to pursue a more glamorous profession and suggested to him that his personality would be well suited for the stage. He surprised his mother by taking the suggestion to heart, although his father was far from enthusiastic. In 2011, Borgnine remembered,

He studied acting at the Randall School of Drama in Hartford, then moved to Virginia, where he became a member of the Barter Theatre in Abingdon, Virginia. It had been named for the director's allowing audiences to barter produce for admission during the cash-lean years of the Great Depression. In 1947, Borgnine landed his first stage role in "State of the Union". Although it was a short role, he won over the audience. His next role was as the Gentleman Caller in Tennessee Williams' "The Glass Menagerie".

In 1949, Borgnine went to New York, where he had his Broadway debut in the role of a nurse in the play "Harvey". More roles on stage led him to being cast for decades as a character actor.

An appearance as the villain on TV's "Captain Video" led to Borgnine's casting in the motion picture "The Whistle at Eaton Falls" (1951) for Columbia Pictures. That year, Borgnine moved to Los Angeles, California, where he eventually received his big break in Columbia's "From Here to Eternity" (1953), playing the sadistic Sergeant "Fatso" Judson, who beats a stockade prisoner in his charge, Angelo Maggio (played by Frank Sinatra). Borgnine built a reputation as a dependable character actor and played villains in early films, including movies such as "Johnny Guitar", "Vera Cruz", and "Bad Day at Black Rock".

In 1955, the actor starred as a warmhearted butcher in "Marty", the film version of the television play of the same name. He gained an Academy Award for Best Actor over Frank Sinatra, James Dean (who had died by the time of the ceremony), and former Best Actor winners Spencer Tracy and James Cagney.

Borgnine's film career flourished for the next three decades, including roles in "The Flight of the Phoenix" (1965), "The Dirty Dozen" (1967), "Ice Station Zebra" (1968), "The Poseidon Adventure" (1972), "Emperor of the North" (1973), "Convoy" (1978), "The Black Hole" (1979), and "Escape from New York" (1981).

One of his most famous roles was that of Dutch, a member of "The Wild Bunch" in the 1969 Western classic from director Sam Peckinpah. Of his role in "The Wild Bunch", Borgnine later said,

Borgnine made his TV debut as a character actor in "Captain Video and His Video Rangers", beginning in 1951. These two episodes led to countless other television roles that Borgnine would gain in "Goodyear Television Playhouse", "The Ford Television Theatre", "Fireside Theatre", "Frontier Justice", "Laramie", "Bob Hope Presents the Chrysler Theatre", "Run for Your Life", "Little House on the Prairie" (a two-part episode entitled "The Lord is My Shepherd"), "The Love Boat", "Magnum, P.I.", "Highway to Heaven", "Murder, She Wrote", "Walker, Texas Ranger", "Home Improvement", "Touched by an Angel", the final episodes of "ER", the first episode of "Wagon Train", and many others.

In 2009, at the age of 92, Borgnine earned a Primetime Emmy Award nomination for his performance as Paul Manning in the series finale of "ER", entitled "And in the End...". He made his first appearance as the character in the preceding episode "Old Times".

In 1962, Borgnine signed a contract with Universal Studios for the lead role as the gruff but lovable skipper, Quinton McHale, in what began as a serious one-hour 1962 episode called "Seven Against the Sea" for "Alcoa Premiere", and later reworked to a comedy called "McHale's Navy", a World War II sitcom, which also co-starred unfamiliar comedians Joe Flynn as Capt. Wally Binghamton and Tim Conway as Ens. Charles Parker. The insubordinate crew of PT-73 helped the show become an overnight success during its first season, landing in the Top 30 in 1963.

Like the McHale character, Borgnine was a longtime navy man in real life. He thrived on the adulation from fans for their favorite navy man, and in 1963 received an Emmy nomination for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Comedy Series. At the end of the fourth season, in 1966 low ratings and repetitive storylines brought "McHale's Navy" to an end.

Tim Conway said about the sitcom: "You know, we were all guys, it was about the war, and about men, so, there weren't many women working on the show, so we can spit, talk, swear, and everything—smoke? Gosh. So, it was male oriented." Conway once referred to Ernest Borgnine making new friends off of the Universal set, "It was the beginning of the trams, going through Universal. Ernie was probably one of the few people at Universal, who would stop the trams and say, 'Hello, how are you?' He would talk to everybody at the tram." While the show "McHale's Navy" was going strong, Tim had also said of Borgnine's short-lived marriage to Ethel Merman, "Ernie is volatile. I mean, there's no question about that; and Ethel was a very strong lady. So, you put 2 bombs in a room, something is going to explode, and I guess it probably did." He also said about the cancellation of "McHale's Navy" was, "We had gone from the South Pacific to Italy, and then, once in a while, we got to New York or something. The storylines were beginning to duplicate themselves. So, they actually said, 'Maybe, they had its run!'". Conway kept in touch with Borgnine for more than 40 years, while living not too far from one another. In 1999, the duo reunited to guest-voice in several episodes of the popular 2000s animated comedy, "SpongeBob SquarePants". Katy Jurado's death in 2002 drew Borgnine and Conway much closer, as Tim had heard so much of the actress's death. He said he heard his resisting friend once referred to one of his ex-wives, "Beautiful, but a tiger." After Conway lost his TV captain, he later said, if Borgnine was more than likely to have died an Italian count, had it not been for Mussolini, "I can't envision him as a count," Tim had also said about "McHale's Navy" debuted, a half a century ago, boosting both ABC and the Navy fortunes: "But maybe as a king---certainly not a count." The last thing he said about his acting mentor's long career: "There were no limits to Ernie," said Conway, "When you look at his career---"Fatso Judson" to "Marty", that's about as varied as you get in characters and he handled both of them with equal delicacy and got the most out of those characters."

Borgnine returned to a new contract with Universal Studios in 1983, for a co-starring role opposite Jan-Michael Vincent, on "Airwolf". After he was approached by producer Donald P. Bellisario, who had been impressed by Borgnine's guest role as a wrestler in a 1982 episode of "Magnum, P.I.", he immediately agreed. He played Dominic Santini, a helicopter pilot, in the series, which became an immediate hit. Borgnine's strong performances belied his exhaustion due to the grueling production schedule, and the challenges of working with his younger, troubled series lead. The show was cancelled by CBS in 1986.

He auditioned a third time for a co-starring role opposite Jonathan Silverman in "The Single Guy" as doorman Manny Cordoba, which lasted two seasons. According to Silverman, Borgnine came to work with more energy and passion than all other stars combined. He was the first person to arrive on the set every day and the last to leave.

In 1996, Borgnine starred in the televised fantasy/thriller film "Merlin's Shop of Mystical Wonders" (partially adapted from the 1984 horror film "The Devil's Gift"). As narrator and storyteller, Borgnine recounts a string of related supernatural tales, his modern-day fables notably centering on an enchanted and malicious cymbal-banging monkey toy stolen from the wizard Merlin. The film was later featured in the parodical television series "Mystery Science Theater 3000", and has since gained a prominent cult following.

Also in 1996, Borgnine toured the United States on a bus to meet his fans and see the country. The trip was the subject of a 1997 documentary, "Ernest Borgnine on the Bus". He also served one year as the chairman of the National Salute to Hospitalized Veterans, visiting patients in many Department of Veterans Affairs medical centers.

Starting in 1999, Borgnine provided his voice talent to the animated sitcom "SpongeBob SquarePants" as the elderly superhero Mermaid Man (where he was paired up with his "McHale's Navy" co-star Tim Conway as the voice of Mermaid Man's sidekick Barnacle Boy). He expressed affection for this role, in no small part for its popularity among children. After his death Nickelodeon re-aired all of the episodes in which Mermaid Man appeared in memoriam. Borgnine also appeared as himself in "The Simpsons" episode "Boy-Scoutz 'n the Hood", in addition to a number of television commercials. In 2000, he was the executive producer of "Hoover", in which he was the only credited actor.

In 2007, Borgnine starred in the Hallmark original film "A Grandpa for Christmas". He played a man who, after his estranged daughter ends up in the hospital because of a car accident, discovers that he has a granddaughter he never knew about. She is taken into his care, and they soon become great friends. Borgnine received a Golden Globe nomination for Best Actor in a Mini-Series or Motion Picture made for Television for his performance. At 90, he was the oldest Golden Globe nominee ever.

Borgnine's autobiography "Ernie" was published by Citadel Press in July 2008. "Ernie" is a loose, conversational recollection of highlights from his acting career and notable events from his personal life.

On April 2, 2009, he appeared in the last episode of the long-running medical series "ER". His role was that of a husband whose long marriage ended with his wife's death. In his final scene, his character is in a hospital bed lying beside his just-deceased wife. His performance garnered an Emmy nomination for Outstanding Guest Actor in a Drama Series, his third nomination and his first in 29 years (since being nominated for Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Limited Series or a Special in 1980 for "All Quiet on the Western Front").

In 2009, at age 92, he starred as Frank, the main character of "Another Harvest Moon", directed by Greg Swartz and also starring Piper Laurie and Anne Meara. On October 2, 2010, Borgnine appeared as himself in a sketch on "Saturday Night Live". On October 15, 2010, he appeared in "Red", which was filmed earlier that year. In late 2011, Borgnine completed what would be his last film, playing Rex Page in "The Man Who Shook The Hand of Vicente Fernandez".

Borgnine married five times. His first marriage, from 1949 to 1958, was to Rhoda Kemins, whom he met while serving in the Navy. They had one daughter, Nancee (born May 28, 1952). He was then married to actress Katy Jurado from 1959 to 1963. Borgnine's marriage to singer Ethel Merman in 1964 lasted only 32 days. Their time together was mostly spent hurling profane insults at each other, and both would later admit that the marriage was a colossal mistake (Merman's description of the marriage in her autobiography was a solitary blank page). Their divorce was finalized on May 25, 1965.

From 1965 to 1972, Borgnine was married to Donna Rancourt, with whom he had a son, Cristopher (born August 9, 1969) and two daughters, Sharon (born August 5, 1965) and Diana (born December 29, 1970). His fifth and last marriage was to Tova Traesnaes, which lasted from February 24, 1973 until his death in July 2012.

In 2000, Borgnine received his 50-year pin as a Freemason at Abingdon Lodge No. 48 in Abingdon, Virginia. He joined the Scottish Rite Valley of Los Angeles in 1964, received the KCCH in 1979, was crowned a 33° Inspector General Honorary in 1983, and received the Grand Cross of the Court of Honour in 1991.

Borgnine was a heavy smoker until 1962, after which he became a militant anti-smoker.

Borgnine died of kidney failure on July 8, 2012 at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles, California, with his family at his side. He was 95 years old.

Borgnine's hometown of Hamden, Connecticut, where he enjoyed a large and vocal following, named a street in his honor. For 30 years (1972–2002), Borgnine marched in Milwaukee's annual Great Circus Parade as the "Grand Clown".

In 1994, Borgnine received the Ellis Island Medal of Honor from the National Ethnic Coalition of Organizations.

In 1996, he was inducted into the Western Performers Hall of Fame at the National Cowboy & Western Heritage Museum in Oklahoma City.

In 1997, Borgnine was the commencement speaker at Lakeland College, and received an honorary doctorate in humane letters in recognition of his distinguished acting career.

In 1998, the Palm Springs, California, Walk of Stars dedicated a Golden Palm Star to him.

In 2006 the comune of Ottiglio, Italy, his father's birthplace, gave him the honorary citizenship.

"" is dedicated to Borgnine.

Borgnine won the 1955 Academy Award for Best Actor for his portrayal of Marty Piletti in the film "Marty". At the time of his death, he was the oldest living recipient of the Best Actor Oscar.

For his contributions to the film industry, Borgnine received a motion pictures star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame in 1960. The star is located at 6324 Hollywood Boulevard.

He was honored with the Screen Actors Guild Life Achievement Award at the 17th Screen Actors Guild Awards, held January 30, 2011.

In 2000, Borgnine received his 50-year pin as a Freemason in Abingdon Lodge No. 48, Abingdon, Virginia. He joined the Scottish Rite Valley of Los Angeles (in the Southern Jurisdiction of the U.S.A) in 1964, received the KCCH in 1979, was crowned a 33° Inspector General Honorary in 1983, and received the Grand Cross of the Court of Honour in 1991. He was also a member of the Loyal Order of Moose at that organization's Lodge in Junction City, Oregon. He volunteered to be Stories of Service National spokesman, urging his fellow World War II vets to come forward and share their stories.





</doc>
<doc id="564099" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=564099" title="Philip Seymour Hoffman">
Philip Seymour Hoffman

Philip Seymour Hoffman (July 23, 1967 – February 2, 2014) was an American actor, director, and producer. Best known for his distinctive supporting and character roles – typically lowlifes, eccentrics, bullies, and misfits – Hoffman acted in many films from the early 1990s until his death in 2014.

Drawn to theater as a teenager, Hoffman studied acting at New York University's Tisch School of the Arts. He began his screen career in a 1991 episode of "Law & Order" and started to appear in films in 1992. He gained recognition for his supporting work, notably in "Boogie Nights" (1997), "Happiness" (1998), "Patch Adams" (1998), "The Big Lebowski" (1998), "Magnolia" (1999), "The Talented Mr. Ripley" (1999), "Almost Famous" (2000), "Punch-Drunk Love" (2002), and "Along Came Polly" (2004). He began to occasionally play leading roles, and for his portrayal of the author Truman Capote in "Capote" (2005), won multiple accolades including the Academy Award for Best Actor. Hoffman's profile continued to grow, and he received three more Oscar nominations for his supporting work as a brutally frank CIA officer in "Charlie Wilson's War" (2007), a priest accused of pedophilia in "Doubt" (2008), and the charismatic leader of a Scientology-type movement in "The Master" (2012).

While he mainly worked in independent films, including "The Savages" (2007) and "Synecdoche, New York" (2008), Hoffman also appeared in Hollywood blockbusters, such as "Twister" (1996) and "" (2006), and in one of his final roles, as Plutarch Heavensbee in the "Hunger Games" series (2013–15). The feature "Jack Goes Boating" (2010) marked his debut as a filmmaker. Hoffman was also an accomplished theater actor and director. He joined the off-Broadway LAByrinth Theater Company in 1995, where he directed, produced, and appeared in numerous stage productions. His performances in three Broadway plays – "True West" in 2000, "Long Day's Journey into Night" in 2003, and "Death of a Salesman" in 2012 – all led to Tony Award nominations.

Hoffman struggled with drug addiction as a young adult, and relapsed in 2013 after many years of abstinence. In February 2014, he died of an overdose. Remembered for his fearlessness in playing reprehensible characters, and for bringing depth and humanity to such roles, Hoffman was described in his "New York Times" obituary as "perhaps the most ambitious and widely admired American actor of his generation".

Hoffman was born on July 23, 1967, in the Rochester suburb of Fairport, New York. His mother, Marilyn O'Connor (née Loucks), came from nearby Waterloo and worked as an elementary school teacher before becoming a lawyer and eventually a family court judge. His father, Gordon Stowell Hoffman, was a native of Geneva, New York, and worked for the Xerox Corporation. Along with one brother, Gordy, Hoffman had two sisters, Jill and Emily.

Hoffman was baptized a Roman Catholic and attended mass as a child, but did not have a heavily religious upbringing. His parents divorced when he was nine, leaving the children to be raised primarily by their mother. Hoffman's childhood passion was sports, particularly wrestling and baseball, but at age 12, he saw a stage production of Arthur Miller's "All My Sons" and was transfixed. He recalled in 2008, "I was changed – permanently changed – by that experience. It was like a miracle to me". Hoffman developed a love for the theater, and proceeded to attend regularly with his mother, who was a lifelong enthusiast. He remembered that productions of "Quilters" and "Alms for the Middle Class", the latter starring a teenaged Robert Downey, Jr., were also particularly inspirational. At the age of 14, Hoffman suffered a neck injury that ended his sporting activity, and he began to consider acting. Encouraged by his mother, he joined a drama club, and initially committed to it because he was attracted to a female member.

Acting gradually became a passion for Hoffman: "I loved the camaraderie of it, the people, and that's when I decided it was what I wanted to do." At the age of 17, he was selected to attend the 1984 New York State Summer School of the Arts in Saratoga Springs, where he met his future collaborators Bennett Miller and Dan Futterman. Miller later commented on Hoffman's popularity at the time: "We were attracted to the fact that he was genuinely serious about what he was doing. Even then, he was passionate." Hoffman applied for several drama degree programs and was accepted to New York University's (NYU) Tisch School of the Arts. Between starting on the program and graduating from Fairport High School, he continued his training at the Circle in the Square Theatre's summer program. Hoffman had positive memories of his time at NYU, where he supported himself by working as an usher. With friends, he co-founded the Bullstoi Ensemble acting troupe. He received a drama degree in 1989.

After graduating, Hoffman worked in off-Broadway theater and made additional money with customer service jobs. He made his screen debut in 1991, in a "Law & Order" episode called "The Violence of Summer", playing a man accused of rape. His first cinema role came the following year, when he was credited as "Phil Hoffman" in the independent film "Triple Bogey on a Par Five Hole". After this, he adopted his grandfather's name, Seymour, to avoid confusion with another actor. More film roles promptly followed, with appearances in the studio production "My New Gun", and a small role in the comedy "Leap of Faith", starring Steve Martin. Following these roles, he gained attention playing a spoiled student in the Oscar-winning Al Pacino film "Scent of a Woman" (1992). Hoffman auditioned five times for his role, which "The Guardian" journalist Ryan Gilbey says gave him an early opportunity "to indulge his skill for making unctuousness compelling". The film earned US$134 million worldwide and was the first to get Hoffman noticed. Reflecting on "Scent of a Woman", Hoffman later said "If I hadn't gotten into that film, I wouldn't be where I am today." At this time, he abandoned his job in a delicatessen to become a professional actor.

Hoffman continued playing small roles throughout the early 1990s. After appearing in "Joey Breaker" and the critically panned teen zombie picture "My Boyfriend's Back", he had a more notable role playing John Cusack's wealthy friend in the crime comedy "Money for Nothing". In 1994, he portrayed an inexperienced mobster in the crime thriller "The Getaway", starring Alec Baldwin and Kim Basinger, and appeared with Andy García and Meg Ryan in the romantic drama "When a Man Loves a Woman". He then played an uptight police deputy who gets punched by Paul Newman – one of Hoffman's acting idols – in the drama "Nobody's Fool".

Still considering stage work to be fundamental to his career, Hoffman joined the LAByrinth Theater Company of New York City in 1995. This association lasted the remainder of his life; along with appearing in multiple productions, he later became co-artistic director of the theater company with John Ortiz, and directed various plays over the years. Hoffman's only film appearance of 1995 was in the 22-minute short comedy "The Fifteen Minute Hamlet", which satirized the film industry in an Elizabethan setting. He played the characters of Bernardo, Horatio, and Laertes alongside Austin Pendleton's Hamlet.

Between April and May 1996, Hoffman appeared at the Joseph Papp Public Theater in a Mark Wing-Davey production of Caryl Churchill's "The Skriker". Following this, based on his work in "Scent of a Woman", he was cast by writer–director Paul Thomas Anderson to appear in his debut feature "Hard Eight" (1996). Hoffman had only a brief role in the crime thriller, playing a cocksure young craps player, but it began the most important collaboration of his career.
Before cementing his creative partnership with Anderson, Hoffman appeared in one of the year's biggest blockbusters, "Twister", playing a grubby, hyperactive storm chaser alongside Helen Hunt and Bill Paxton. According to a "People" survey of Twitter and Facebook users, "Twister" is the film with which Hoffman is most popularly associated. He then reunited with Anderson for the director's second feature, "Boogie Nights", about the Golden Age of Pornography. The ensemble-piece starred Mark Wahlberg, Julianne Moore, and Burt Reynolds; Hoffman played a boom operator, described by David Fear of "Rolling Stone" as a "complete, unabashed loser", who attempts to seduce Wahlberg's character. Warmly received by critics, the film grew into a cult classic, and it has been cited as the role in which Hoffman first showed his full ability. Fear commended the "naked emotional neediness" of the performance, adding that it made for compulsive viewing. Hoffman later expressed his appreciation for Anderson when he called the director "incomparable".

Continuing with this momentum, Hoffman appeared in five films in 1998. He had supporting roles in the crime thriller "Montana" and the romantic comedy "Next Stop Wonderland", both of which were commercial failures, before working with the Coen brothers in their dark comedy "The Big Lebowski". Hoffman had long been a fan of the directors, and relished the experience of working with them. Appearing alongside Jeff Bridges and John Goodman, Hoffman played Brandt, the smug personal assistant of the titular character. Although it was only a small role, he claimed it was one for which he was most recognized, in a film that has achieved cult status and a large fan base. Between March and April 1998, Hoffman made 30 appearances on stage at the New York Theatre Workshop in a production of Mark Ravenhill's "Shopping and Fucking", portraying an ex-heroin addict.

Hoffman took an unflattering role in Todd Solondz's "Happiness" (1998), a misanthropic comedy about the lives of three sisters and those around them. He played Allen, a strange loner who makes crude phone calls to women; the character furiously masturbates during one conversation, producing what film scholar Jerry Mosher calls an "embarrassingly raw performance". Jake Coyle of the Associated Press rated Allen as one of the creepiest characters in American cinema, but critic Xan Brooks highlighted the pathos that Hoffman brought to the role. "Happiness" was controversial but widely praised, and Hoffman's role has been cited by critics as one of his best. His final 1998 release was more mainstream, as he appeared as a medical graduate in the Robin Williams comedy "Patch Adams". The film was critically panned, but one of the highest-grossing of Hoffman's career.

In 1999, Hoffman starred opposite Robert De Niro as drag queen Rusty Zimmerman in Joel Schumacher's drama "Flawless". Hoffman considered De Niro the most imposing actor with whom he had appeared, and felt that working with the veteran performer profoundly improved his own acting. Hoffman's ability to avoid clichés in playing such a delicate role was noted by critics, and Roger Ebert said it confirmed him as "one of the best new character actors". He was rewarded with his first Screen Actors Guild Award nomination. Hoffman then reunited with Paul Thomas Anderson, where he was given an atypically virtuous role in the ensemble drama "Magnolia". The film, set over one day in Los Angeles, features Hoffman as a nurse who cares for Jason Robards' character. The performance was approved of by the medical industry, and Jessica Winter of the "Village Voice" considered it Hoffman's most indelible work, likening him to a guardian angel in his caring for the dying father. "Magnolia" has been included in lists of the greatest films of all time, and it was a personal favorite of Hoffman's.

One of the most critically and commercially successful films of Hoffman's career was "The Talented Mr. Ripley" (1999), which he considered "as edgy as you can get for a Hollywood movie". He played a "preppy bully" who taunts Matt Damon's Ripley in the thriller, a character which Jeff Simon of "The Buffalo News" called "the truest upper class twit in all of American movies". Hoffman's performance caught the attention of Meryl Streep – another of his cinematic idols – with his performance: "I sat up straight in my seat and said, 'Who is that?' I thought to myself: My God, this actor is fearless. He's done what we all strive for – he's given this awful character the respect he deserves, and he's made him fascinating." In recognition of his work in "Magnolia" and "The Talented Mr. Ripley", Hoffman was named the year's Best Supporting Actor by the National Board of Review.

Following a string of roles in successful films in the late 1990s, Hoffman had established a reputation as a top supporting player who could be relied on to make an impression with each performance. His film appearances were likened by David Kamp of "GQ" to "discovering a prize in a box of cereal, receiving a bonus, or bumping unexpectedly into an old friend". According to Jerry Mosher, as the year 2000 began, "it seemed Hoffman was everywhere, poised on the cusp of stardom".

Hoffman had begun to be recognized as a theater actor in 1999, when he received a Drama Desk Award nomination for Outstanding Featured Actor for the off-Broadway play "The Author's Voice". This success continued with the 2000 Broadway revival of Sam Shepard's "True West", where Hoffman alternated roles nightly with co-star John C. Reilly, making 154 appearances between March and July 2000. Ben Brantley of "The New York Times" felt that it was the best stage performance of Hoffman's career, calling him "brilliant", and the actor earned a Tony Award nomination for Best Actor in a Play. The following year, Hoffman appeared with Meryl Streep, Natalie Portman, and John Goodman in a Delacorte Theater production of Chekhov's "The Seagull" – although Brantley felt that this performance was less fully realized. As a stage director, Hoffman received two Drama Desk Award nominations for Outstanding Director of a Play: one for "Jesus Hopped the 'A' Train" in 2001, and another for "Our Lady of 121st Street" in 2003. In a 2008 interview, Hoffman opined that "switching hats" between acting and directing helped him improve in both roles.

David Mamet's comedy "State and Main", about the difficulties of shooting a film in rural New England, was Hoffman's first film role of 2000 and had a limited release. He had a more prominent supporting role that year in "Almost Famous", Cameron Crowe's popular coming-of-age film set around the 1970s music industry. Hoffman portrayed the enthusiastic rock critic Lester Bangs, a task by which he felt burdened, but he managed to convey the real figure's mannerisms and sharp wit after watching him in a BBC interview. The following year, Hoffman featured as the narrator and interviewer in "The Party's Over", a documentary about the 2000 U.S. elections. He assumed the position of a "politically informed and alienated Generation-Xer" who seeks to be educated in U.S. politics, but ultimately reveals the extent of public dissatisfaction in this area.

In 2002, Hoffman was given his first leading role (despite joking at the time "Even if I was hired into a leading-man part, I'd probably turn it into the non-leading-man part") in Todd Louiso's tragicomedy "Love Liza" (2002). His brother Gordy wrote the script, which Hoffman had seen at their mother's house five years earlier, about a widower who starts sniffing gasoline to cope with his wife's suicide. He considered it the finest piece of writing he had ever read, "incredibly humble in its exploration of grief", but critics were less enthusiastic about the production. A review for the BBC wrote that Hoffman had finally been given a part that showed "what he's truly capable of", but few witnessed this as the film had a limited release and earned only US$210,000.

Later in 2002, Hoffman starred opposite Adam Sandler and Emily Watson in Anderson's critically acclaimed fourth picture, the surrealist romantic comedy-drama "Punch-Drunk Love" (2002), where he played an illegal phone-sex "supervisor". Drew Hunt of the "Chicago Reader" saw the performance as a fine example of Hoffman's "knack for turning small roles into seminal performances", and praised the actor's comedic ability. In a very different film, Hoffman was next seen with Anthony Hopkins in the high-budget thriller "Red Dragon", a prequel to "The Silence of the Lambs", portraying the meddlesome tabloid journalist Freddy Lounds. His fourth appearance of 2002 came in Spike Lee's drama "25th Hour", playing an English teacher who makes a devastating drunken mistake. Both Lee and the film's lead Edward Norton were thrilled to work with Hoffman, and Lee confessed that he had long wanted to do a picture with the actor, but had waited until he found the right role. Hoffman considered his character, Jakob, to be one of the most reticent characters he had ever played, a straight-laced "corduroy-pants-wearing kind of guy." Roger Ebert promoted "25th Hour" to one of his "Great Movies" in 2009, and along with A. O. Scott, considered it to be one of the best films of the 2000s.

The drama "Owning Mahowny" (2003) gave Hoffman his second lead role, starring opposite Minnie Driver as a bank employee who embezzles money to feed his gambling addiction. Based on the true story of Toronto banker Brian Molony, who committed the largest fraud in Canadian history, Hoffman met with Molony to prepare for the role and help him play the character as accurately as possible. He was determined not to conform to "movie character" stereotypes, and his portrayal of addiction won approval from the Royal College of Psychiatrists. Roger Ebert assessed Hoffman's performance as "a masterpiece of discipline and precision", but the film earned little at the box office.

Hoffman's second 2003 appearance was a small role in Anthony Minghella's successful Civil War epic "Cold Mountain". He played an immoral preacher, a complex character that Hoffman described as a "mass of contradictions". The same year, from April to August, he appeared with Vanessa Redgrave in a Broadway revival of Eugene O'Neill's "Long Day's Journey into Night". Director Robert Falls later commented on the dedication and experience that Hoffman brought to his role of alcoholic Jamie Tyrone: "Every night he ripped it up to an extent that he couldn't leave [the role]. Phil carried it with him." Hoffman received his second Tony Award nomination, this time for Best Featured Actor in a Play. In 2004, he appeared as the crude, has-been actor friend of Ben Stiller's character in the box-office hit "Along Came Polly". Reflecting on the role, "People" said it proved that "Hoffman could deliver comedic performances with the best of them".

A turning point in Hoffman's career came with the biographical film "Capote" (2005), which dramatized Truman Capote's experience of writing his true crime novel "In Cold Blood" (1966). Hoffman took the title role, in a project that he co-produced and helped come to fruition. Portraying the idiosyncratic writer proved highly demanding, requiring significant weight loss and four months of research – such as watching video clips of Capote to help him affect the author's effeminate voice and mannerisms. Hoffman stated that he was not concerned with perfectly imitating Capote's speech, but did feel a great duty to "express the vitality and the nuances" of the writer. During filming, he stayed in character constantly so as not to lose the voice and posture: "Otherwise", he explained, "I would give my body a chance to bail on me." "Capote" was released to great acclaim, particularly regarding Hoffman's performance. Many critics commented that the role was designed to win awards, and indeed Hoffman received an Oscar, Golden Globe, Screen Actors Guild Award, BAFTA, and various other critics' awards. In 2006, "Premiere" listed his role in "Capote" as the 35th-greatest movie performance of all time. After the film, several commentators began to describe Hoffman as one of the finest, most ambitious actors of his generation.

Hoffman received his only Primetime Emmy Award nomination for his supporting role in the HBO miniseries "Empire Falls" (2005), about life in a New England town, but lost to castmate Paul Newman. In 2006, he appeared in the summer blockbuster "", playing the villainous arms dealer Owen Davian opposite Tom Cruise. A journalist for "Vanity Fair" stated that Hoffman's "black-hat performance was one of the most delicious in a Hollywood film since Alan Rickman's in "Die Hard" ", and he was generally approved of for bringing gravitas to the action film. With a gross of nearly US$400 million, it exposed Hoffman to a mainstream audience.

Returning to independent films in 2007, Hoffman began with a starring role in Tamara Jenkins's "The Savages", where Laura Linney and he played siblings responsible for putting their dementia-ridden father (Philip Bosco) in a care home. Jake Coyle of the Associated Press stated that it was "the epitome of a Hoffman film: a mix of comedy and tragedy told with subtlety, bone-dry humor, and flashes of grace". Hoffman received a Golden Globe nomination for his performance in "The Savages". He next appeared in "Before the Devil Knows You're Dead", the final film by veteran director Sidney Lumet, where he played a realtor who embezzles funds from his employer to support his drug habit. Mosher comments that the character was one of the most unpleasant of Hoffman's career, but that his "fearlessness again revealed the humanity within a deeply flawed character" as he appeared naked in the opening anal sex scene. The film was received positively by critics as a powerful and affecting thriller.

Mike Nichols's political film "Charlie Wilson's War" (2007) gave Hoffman his second Academy Award nomination, again for playing a real individual – Gust Avrakotos, the CIA agent who conspired with Congressman Charlie Wilson (played by Tom Hanks) to aid Afghani rebels in their fight against the Soviet Union. Todd McCarthy wrote of Hoffman's performance: "Decked out with a pouffy '80s hairdo, moustache, protruding gut and ever-present smokes ... whenever he's on, the picture vibrates with conspiratorial electricity." The film was a critical and commercial success, and along with his Oscar nomination for Best Supporting Actor, Hoffman was nominated for a BAFTA and a Golden Globe Award.

The year 2008 contained two significant Hoffman roles. In Charlie Kaufman's enigmatic drama "Synecdoche, New York", he starred as Caden Cotard, a frustrated dramatist who attempts to build a scale replica of New York inside a warehouse for a play. Hoffman again showed his willingness to reveal unattractive traits, as the character ages and deteriorates, and committed to a deeply psychological role. Critics were divided in their response to the "ambitious and baffling" film. Sonny Bunch of "The Washington Times" found it "impressionistic, inaccessible, and endlessly frustrating", likening Hoffman's character to "God, if God lacked imagination". Roger Ebert, on the contrary, named it the best film of the decade and considered it one of the greatest of all time, and Robbie Collin, film critic for "The Daily Telegraph", believes Hoffman gave one of cinema's best performances.

Hoffman's second role of the year came opposite Meryl Streep and Amy Adams in John Patrick Shanley's "Doubt", where he played Father Brendan Flynn – a priest accused of sexually abusing a 12-year-old African American student in the 1960s. Hoffman was already familiar with the play and appreciated the opportunity to bring it to the screen; in preparing for the role, he talked extensively to a priest who lived through the era. The film had a mixed reception, with some critics such as Peter Bradshaw of "The Guardian" suspicious of it as Oscar bait, but Hoffman gained second consecutive Best Supporting Actor nominations at the Oscars, BAFTAs, and Golden Globes, and was also nominated by the Screen Actors Guild.

On stage in 2009, Hoffman played Iago in Peter Sellars' futuristic production of "Othello" (with the title role by John Ortiz), which received mixed reviews. Ben Brantley, theatre critic of "The New York Times", found it to be "exasperatingly misconceived", remarking that even when Hoffman is attempting to "manipulate others into self-destruction, he comes close to spoiling everything by erupting into genuine, volcanic fury". Hoffman also did his first vocal performance for the claymation film "Mary and Max", although the film did not initially have an American release. He played Max, a depressed New Yorker with Asperger syndrome, while Toni Collette voiced Mary – the Australian girl who becomes his pen pal. Continuing with animation, Hoffman then worked on an episode of the children's show "Arthur" and received a Daytime Emmy Award nomination for Outstanding Performer In An Animated Program. Later in the year, he played a brash American disc jockey opposite Bill Nighy and Rhys Ifans in Richard Curtis's British comedy "The Boat That Rocked" (also known as "Pirate Radio") – a character based on Emperor Rosko, a host of Radio Caroline in 1966. He also had a cameo role as a bartender in Ricky Gervais's "The Invention of Lying".

Reflecting on Hoffman's work in the late 2000s, Mosher writes that the actor remained impressive, but had not delivered a testing performance on the level of his work in "Capote". The film critic David Thomson believed that Hoffman showed indecisiveness at this time, unsure whether to play spectacular supporting roles or become a lead actor who is capable of controlling the emotional dynamic and outcome of a film.

Hoffman's profile continued to grow with the new decade, and he became an increasingly recognizable figure. Despite earlier reservations about directing for the screen, his first release of the 2010s was also his first as a film director. The independent drama "Jack Goes Boating" was adapted from Robert Glaudini's play of the same name, in which Hoffman had starred and directed for the LAByrinth Theater Company in 2007. He originally intended only to direct the film, but decided to reprise the main role of Jack – a lonely limousine driver looking for love – after the actor he wanted for it was unavailable. The low-key film had a limited release, and was not a high earner, though it received many positive reviews. However, Dave Edwards of the "Daily Mirror" remarked that "Hoffman's directing debut delivers a film so weak I could barely remember what it was about as I left", while critic Mark Kermode appreciated the cinematic qualities that Hoffman brought to the film, and stated that he showed potential as a director. In addition to "Jack Goes Boating", in 2010 Hoffman also directed Brett C. Leonard's tragic drama "The Long Red Road" for the Goodman Theatre in Chicago. Steven Oxman of "Variety" described the production as "heavy handed" and "predictable", but "intriguing and at least partially successful".

Hoffman next had significant supporting roles in two films, both released in the last third of 2011. In "Moneyball", a sports drama about the 2002 season of the Oakland Athletics baseball team, he played the manager Art Howe. The film was a critical and commercial success, and Hoffman was described as "perfectly cast" by Ann Hornaday of "The Washington Post", but the real-life Art Howe accused the filmmakers of giving an "unfair and untrue" portrayal of him. Hoffman's second film of the year was George Clooney's political drama "The Ides of March", in which he played the earnest campaign manager to the Democratic presidential candidate Mike Morris (Clooney). The film was well-received and Hoffman's performance, especially in the scenes opposite Paul Giamatti – who played the rival campaign manager – was positively noted. Hoffman's work on the film earned him his fourth BAFTA Award nomination.

In the spring of 2012, Hoffman made his final stage appearance, starring as Willy Loman in a Broadway revival of "Death of a Salesman". Directed by Mike Nichols, the production ran for 78 performances and was the highest-grossing show in the Ethel Barrymore Theatre's history. Many critics felt that Hoffman, at 44, was too young for the role of 62-year-old Loman, and Chris Jones of the "Chicago Tribune" felt that the character had been interpreted poorly. Hoffman admitted that he found the role difficult, but he nevertheless earned his third Tony Award nomination.

Hoffman collaborated with Paul Thomas Anderson for the fifth time in "The Master" (2012), where he turned in what critic Peter Bradshaw considered the most memorable performance of his career. Set in 1950s America, the film featured Hoffman as Lancaster Dodd, the charismatic leader of a nascent Scientology-type movement who brings a troubled man (Joaquin Phoenix) under his tutelage. Hoffman was instrumental in the project's development, having been involved with it for three years. He assisted Anderson in the writing of the script by reviewing samples of it, and suggested making Phoenix's character, Freddie Quell, the protagonist instead of Dodd. A talented dancer, Hoffman was able to showcase his abilities by performing a jig during a surreal sequence; Bradshaw called it an "extraordinary moment" that "only Hoffman could have carried off." "The Master" was praised as an intelligent and challenging drama, and Drew Hunt of the "Chicago Reader" also felt that it contained Hoffman's finest work: "He's inscrutable yet welcoming, intimidating yet charismatic, villainous yet fatherly. He epitomizes so many things at once that it's impossible to think of [Dodd] as mere movie character". Hoffman and Phoenix received a joint Volpi Cup Award at the Venice Film Festival for their performances, and Hoffman was also nominated for an Academy Award, a Golden Globe, a BAFTA Award and a SAG Award for the supporting role.

"A Late Quartet" was Hoffman's other film release of 2012, where he played a violinist in a string quartet whose members (played by Christopher Walken, Catherine Keener, and Mark Ivanir) face a crisis when one is diagnosed with Parkinson's disease. The drama received favorable reviews, and Stephen Holden of "The New York Times" called Hoffman's performance "exceptional". In 2013, Hoffman joined the popular "Hunger Games" series in its second film, "", where he played gamemaker Plutarch Heavensbee. The film finished as the 10th-highest grossing in history to that point, and made Hoffman recognizable to a new generation of film-goers. In January 2014, shortly before his death, he attended the Sundance Film Festival to promote two films. In Anton Corbijn's "A Most Wanted Man", a thriller based on John le Carré's novel, Hoffman played a German intelligence officer. His performance was praised by Xan Brooks as one of "terrific, lip-smacking relish: full of mischief, anchored by integrity." The other was "God's Pocket", the directorial debut of actor John Slattery, in which Hoffman played a thief. In November 2014, nine months after his death, Hoffman was seen in "".

At the time of his death, Hoffman was filming "", the final film in the series, and had already completed the majority of his scenes. His two remaining scenes were rewritten to compensate for his absence, and the film was released in November 2015. Hoffman was also preparing for his second directorial effort, a Prohibition-era drama titled "Ezekiel Moss", which was to star Amy Adams and Jake Gyllenhaal. In addition, he had filmed a pilot episode for the Showtime series "Happyish", in which he played the lead role of an advertising executive, but plans for a full season were put on hold following his death. The role was later passed on to Steve Coogan.

Hoffman rarely mentioned his personal life in interviews, stating in 2012 that he would "rather not because my family doesn't have any choice. If I talk about them in the press, I'm giving them no choice. So I choose not to." For the last 14 years of his life, he was in a relationship with costume designer Mimi O'Donnell, whom he had met in 1999 when they were both working on the play "In Arabia We'd All Be Kings", which Hoffman directed. They lived in New York City and had a son, Cooper (2003), and two daughters, Tallulah (2006) and Willa (2008). Hoffman and O'Donnell separated in the fall of 2013, some months before his death.

Hoffman was also discreet about his religious and political beliefs, but it is known that he voted for the Green Party candidate Ralph Nader in the 2000 presidential election. He felt that keeping his personal life private was beneficial to his career: "The less you know about me the more interesting it will be to watch me do what I do".

In a 2006 interview with "60 Minutes", Hoffman revealed he had engaged in drug and alcohol abuse during his time at New York University, saying he had used "anything I could get my hands on. I liked it all." Following his graduation in 1989, he entered a drug rehabilitation program at age 22, and remained sober for 23 years. However, he relapsed in 2013, and admitted himself to drug rehabilitation for about 10 days in May of that year.

Although friends stated that Hoffman's drug use was under control at the time, on February 2, 2014, the actor was found dead in the bathroom of his Manhattan apartment by a friend, playwright and screenwriter David Bar Katz. Hoffman was 46 years old. Detectives searching the apartment found heroin and prescription medications at the scene, and revealed that he was discovered with a syringe in his arm. The death was officially ruled an accident caused by "acute mixed drug intoxication, including heroin, cocaine, benzodiazepines, and amphetamine". Whether Hoffman had taken all of the substances on the same day, or whether any of the substances had remained in his system from earlier use was not determined. A funeral was held at St. Ignatius Loyola Church in Manhattan on February 7, 2014, and was attended by many of his former co-stars.

Hoffman's unexpected death was widely lamented by fans and the film industry, and was described by several commentators as a considerable loss to the profession. On February 5, 2014, the LAByrinth Theatre Company honored his memory by holding a candlelight vigil, and Broadway dimmed its lights for one minute. In another tribute, actress Cate Blanchett dedicated her BAFTA trophy to Hoffman when she received the award for "Blue Jasmine" on February 16. Three weeks after Hoffman's death, David Bar Katz established the American Playwriting Foundation in the actor's memory. With the money received from a libel lawsuit against the "National Enquirer" (which had inaccurately published that Hoffman and Katz were lovers), the foundation awards an annual prize of US$45,000 to the author of an unproduced play. Katz named this the "Relentless Prize" in honor of Hoffman's dedication to the profession. Hoffman left his fortune, around US$35 million, to Mimi O'Donnell in his October 2004 will, trusting her to distribute money to their children.

Hoffman was held in high regard within the film and theater industry, and cited in the media as one of the finest actors of his generation. Despite this status among his peers and critics, he was never one of the most popular film stars, and has been overlooked in lists of all-time greatest actors.
He was not a typical movie actor, with a pudgy build and lacking matinée idol looks, but Hoffman claimed that he was grateful for his appearance as it made him believable in a wide range of roles. Joel Schumacher once said of him in 2000, "The bad news is that Philip won't be a $25-million star. The good news is that he'll work for the rest of his life". The "Aiken Standard" of South Carolina referred to him as an "anti-star", whose real identity remained "amorphous and unmoored". Hoffman was acutely aware that he was often too unorthodox for the Academy voters. He remarked, "I'm sure that people in the big corporations that run Hollywood don't know quite what to do with someone like me, but that's OK. I think there are other people who are interested in what I do."

Most of Hoffman's notable roles came in independent films, including particularly original ones, but he also featured in several Hollywood blockbusters. He generally played supporting roles, appearing in both dramas and comedies, but was noted for his ability to make small parts memorable. Peter Bradshaw, film critic for "The Guardian", felt that "Almost every single one of his credits had something special about it".

Hoffman was praised for his versatility and ability to fully inhabit any role, but specialized in playing creeps and misfits: "his CV was populated almost exclusively by snivelling wretches, insufferable prigs, braggarts and outright bullies", writes the journalist Ryan Gilbey. Hoffman was appreciated for making these roles real, complex and even sympathetic; while Todd Louiso, director of "Love Liza", believed that Hoffman connected to people on screen because he looked like an ordinary man and revealed his vulnerability. Xan Brooks of "The Guardian" remarked that the actor's particular talent was to "take thwarted, twisted humanity and ennoble it". "The more pathetic or deluded the character," writes Gilbey, "the greater Hoffman's relish seemed in rescuing them from the realms of the merely monstrous." When asked in 2006 why he undertook such roles, Hoffman responded, "I didn't go out looking for negative characters; I went out looking for people who have a struggle and a fight to tackle. That's what interests me."

The journalist Jeff Simon described Hoffman as "probably the most in-demand character actor of his generation", but Hoffman claimed never to take it for granted that he would be offered roles. Although he worked hard and regularly, he was humble about his acting success, and when asked by a friend if he was having any luck he quietly replied, "I'm in a film, "Cold Mountain", that has just come out." Patrick Fugit, who worked with Hoffman on "Almost Famous", recalled the actor was intimidating but an exceptional mentor and influence in "a school-of-hard-knocks way", remarking that "there was a certain weight that came with him". Hoffman admitted that he sometimes appeared in big-budget studio films for the money, but said, "ultimately my main goal is to do good work. If it doesn't pay well, so be it." He kept himself grounded and invigorated as an actor by attempting to appear on stage once a year.

Hoffman occasionally changed his hair and lost or gained weight for parts, and he went to great lengths to reveal the worst in his characters. But in a 2012 interview he confessed that performing to a high standard was a challenge: "The job isn't difficult. Doing it well is difficult." In an earlier interview with "The New York Times", he explained how deeply he loved acting but added, "that deep kind of love comes at a price: for me, acting is torturous, and it's torturous because you know it's a beautiful thing ... Wanting it is easy, but trying to be great – well, that's absolutely torturous." This struggle was confirmed by the author John le Carré, who met Hoffman during the adaptation of his novel "A Most Wanted Man". While praising the actor's intelligence and intuition, le Carré acknowledged the burden that Hoffman felt: "It was painful and exhausting work, and probably in the end his undoing. The world was too bright for him to handle."

Hoffman appeared in 55 films and one miniseries during his screen career spanning 22 years. He won the Academy Award for Best Actor for "Capote" (2005), and was nominated three times for Best Supporting Actor for "Charlie Wilson's War" (2007), "Doubt" (2008), and "The Master" (2012). He also received five Golden Globe Award nominations (winning one), five BAFTA Award nominations (winning one), four Screen Actors Guild Awards (winning one), and won the Volpi Cup at the Venice Film Festival. Hoffman remained active in theater throughout his career, starring in ten and directing 19 stage productions (predominantly in New York). He received three Tony Award nominations for his Broadway performances: two for Best Leading Actor, in "True West" (2000) and "Death of a Salesman" (2012), and one for Best Featured Actor in "Long Day's Journey into Night" (2003).




</doc>
