<doc id="519607" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=519607" title="Kathy Bates">
Kathy Bates

Kathleen Doyle Bates (born June 28, 1948) is an American actress and director. Bates began her career on the stage, and was nominated for the Tony Award for Best Lead Actress in a Play in 1983 for her performance in "'night, Mother". She rose to prominence with her performance in "Misery" (1990), for which she won the Academy Award for Best Actress and Golden Globe Award for Best Actress. She followed this with major roles in "Fried Green Tomatoes" (1991) and "Dolores Claiborne" (1995), before playing Molly Brown in "Titanic" (1997).

Bates's television work has resulted in 14 Emmy Award nominations, two of which were for her starring role on the television series "Harry's Law", and most recently a win for her highly praised appearance in of FX horror-thriller series "American Horror Story", where she portrayed the real life socialite Madame Marie Delphine LaLaurie. She won another Emmy Award in 2012 for her portrayal of the ghost of Charlie Harper on CBS comedy series "Two and a Half Men", a role formerly portrayed by Charlie Sheen.

Bates was born in Memphis, Tennessee, the youngest of three daughters of mechanical engineer Langdon Doyle Bates and homemaker Bertye Kathleen ("née" Talbert; 1907–1997) Her paternal grandfather was lawyer and author Finis L. Bates. One of her Irish great-great-grandfathers, who emigrated to New Orleans, Louisiana, served as President Andrew Jackson's doctor. She graduated early from White Station High School (1965) and from Southern Methodist University (1969), where she majored in Theatre and became a member of the Alpha Delta Pi sorority. She moved to New York City in 1970 to pursue an acting career.

Bates' history of Broadway appearances includes Lanford Wilson's "Fifth of July" and the Robert Altman-directed "Come Back to the Five and Dime, Jimmy Dean, Jimmy Dean" with Karen Black and Cher. Bates originated the role of Lenny in the first production of "Crimes of the Heart" at the Actors Theatre of Louisville in 1979. She was nominated for a Tony Award in 1983 for her stage role in the Pulitzer Prize-winning play "'night, Mother" with Anne Pitoniak. The stage production ran for more than a year. One of her other successful New York stage productions was, Off Broadway, in Terrence McNally's "Frankie and Johnny in the Clair de Lune" which ran 533 performances and for which she won an Obie Award for Best Actress in 1988. McNally specifically wrote the play for Bates and F. Murray Abraham, who had to drop out and was replaced by Kenneth Welsh. The play was later filmed as "Frankie and Johnny", starring Al Pacino and Michelle Pfeiffer. She succeeded Amy Irving in the Off-Broadway production of "The Road to Mecca" in 1988.

Bates' first feature film role was in the 1971 Miloš Forman comedy "Taking Off" (credited as "Bobo Bates"), in which she sings an original song "Even Horses Had Wings". Bates' next feature was the Dustin Hoffman film "Straight Time" (1978). In 1977, Bates made her Soap opera debut as Phyllis on NBC's soap opera "The Doctors". From 1983 to 1984, she played prison inmate Belle Bodelle on "All My Children" and from 1984 to 1985, she played Evelyn Maddox on "One Life to Live". In 1990 she would appear again with Hoffman in Warren Beatty's "Dick Tracy" as a stenographer. She appeared in films like "The Morning After" and "Summer Heat", while guest-starring on television's "L.A. Law". She then landed the role of obsessed fan Annie Wilkes, who holds her favorite author (played by James Caan) captive, in the 1990 thriller film "Misery", based on the Stephen King novel. Bates received her first Academy Award nomination for that role, winning Best Actress.

Soon after, she starred with Jessica Tandy in the acclaimed 1991 movie "Fried Green Tomatoes", based on the novel by comedic actress Fannie Flagg. In 1995 Bates played the title character in "Dolores Claiborne", a film adaptation of another Stephen King novel, although she was not nominated for an Oscar. In 1997 Bates played Molly Brown in James Cameron's "Titanic". Based on the 1912 sinking of the RMS Titanic, the film went on to earn more than $1.8 billion in box-office receipts worldwide.

Bates also excelled in her role as the acid-tongued "dustbuster" political advisor Libby Holden in the 1998 drama film "Primary Colors", which was adapted from the book in which political journalist Joe Klein novelized his experiences on the Presidential campaign trail in 1991–1992. For this performance, she received her second Academy Award nomination, for Best Supporting Actress. In 2002 she received her third nomination, for "About Schmidt". More recently, she and Terry Bradshaw played the parents of Matthew McConaughey's character in the 2006 film "Failure to Launch". Bates was featured in an uncredited cameo in the miniseries of Stephen King's "The Stand".

Bates has been nominated for an Emmy Award twelve times, winning two. She was first nominated for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Miniseries or a Movie, for her performance as Jay Leno's manager Helen Kushnick in HBO's "The Late Shift" (1996), and has been nominated in the same category as Miss Hannigan in Disney's remake of "Annie" (1999), and for the HBO Franklin Roosevelt biopic "Warm Springs" (2005). She was nominated for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Miniseries or Movie for Lifetime Television's "Ambulance Girl" (2006), which she also directed, and received a Supporting Actress in a Miniseries or Movie nomination for "Alice".

She appeared in ten episodes of the HBO cable television series "Six Feet Under" for which she received an Emmy Award nomination for Outstanding Guest Actress in a Drama Series, as Bettina, in 2003. She was also nominated for Outstanding Guest Actress in a Comedy Series for "3rd Rock from the Sun" in 1999, the same year that she was nominated for Outstanding Directing in a Miniseries or Movie for the Dashiell Hammett-Lillian Hellman biopic "Dash & Lilly". She also had a recurring guest role on the American version of "The Office" as Jo Bennett.

Starting in the 1990s, Bates forged a formidable career as a director. She has directed episodes of "", "NYPD Blue", "Oz", "Six Feet Under" and "Everwood". Bates directed the television movies "Dash and Lilly" and the self-starring "Ambulance Girl". She directed and co-starred in "Have Mercy" (2006) with Melanie Griffith. In 2008, she re-teamed with Leonardo DiCaprio and Kate Winslet in "Revolutionary Road". She starred in David E. Kelley's legal drama "Harry's Law", which began airing on NBC on January 17, 2011, but was cancelled on May 14, 2012.

In 2012 Bates made a guest appearance on "Two and a Half Men" as the ghost of Charlie Harper on the episode, "Why We Gave Up Women", which aired on April 30, 2012. In the episode Charlie has returned as a ghost to haunt his brother, Alan (Jon Cryer). He tells Alan that after a life of womanizing and debauchery, he was sent to hell and condemned to spend eternity in a woman's body. This guest appearance resulted in Bates winning the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Guest Actress in a Comedy Series. It was Bates' first Emmy win after nine nominations.

In 2013 she began starring in the "American Horror Story" series' third season, "" as Delphine LaLaurie, an immortal racist who is brought back into the modern world after spending years buried alive. For that role, she won an Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Miniseries or a Movie. Bates returned in its fourth season "" as Ethel Darling, a bearded lady who performs in the freak show the season is centred on. She was confirmed for the fifth season of "" where she played Iris, the hotel's manager who hates Sarah Paulson's character Hypodermic Sally. It premiered on October 7, 2015, and concluded on January 13, 2016. On September 14, 2016, Bates returned for her fourth, and the show's sixth season, , playing both Thomasin "The Butcher" White, and White's reenactress, Agnes Mary Winstead.

In June 2016, the Human Rights Campaign released a video in tribute to the victims of the 2016 Orlando gay nightclub shooting; in the video, Bates and others told the stories of the people killed there.

Bates is the Executive Committee Chair of the Actors Branch of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences Board of Governors. In 2014, Bates became a national spokesperson for lymphedema and Chairperson for the Lymphatic Education & Research Network's Honorary Board.

On September 20, 2016, Bates received a motion pictures star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame for her work in the film industry. Her star is located at 6927 Hollywood Boulevard.

Bates was married to Tony Campisi for six years from 1991 until their divorce in 1997.

Bates has successfully battled ovarian cancer since her diagnosis in 2003. In September 2012, she revealed via Twitter that she had been diagnosed with breast cancer two months earlier and had undergone a double mastectomy. In 2014, at the New York Walk for Lymphedema & Lymphatic Diseases, Bates announced via pre-recorded audio that, due to the double mastectomy, she has lymphedema in both arms. At that time, Bates became the National Spokesperson for the Lymphatic Education & Research Network (LE&RN) and has been actively involved in lymphedema and lymphatic disease advocacy.




</doc>
<doc id="78239" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=78239" title="Julie Andrews">
Julie Andrews

Dame Julia Elizabeth Andrews, ("née" Wells; born 1 October 1935), known professionally as Julie Andrews, is an English actress, singer, and author. Andrews, a child actress and singer, appeared on the West End in 1948 and made her Broadway debut in "The Boy Friend" (1954). She rose to prominence starring in Broadway musicals such as "My Fair Lady" (1956), playing Eliza Doolittle, and "Camelot" (1960), playing Queen Guinevere. In 1957, Andrews starred in the premiere of Rodgers and Hammerstein's written-for-television musical "Cinderella", a live, network broadcast seen by over 100 million viewers.

Andrews made her feature film debut in "Mary Poppins" (1964), and won the Academy Award for Best Actress for her performance in the title role. She starred in "The Sound of Music" (1965), playing Maria von Trapp, and won the Golden Globe Award for Best Actress – Motion Picture Comedy or Musical. Between 1964 and 1986, she starred in "The Americanization of Emily" (1964), "Hawaii" (1966), "Torn Curtain" (1966), "Thoroughly Modern Millie" (1967), "Star!" (1968), "The Tamarind Seed" (1974), "10" (1979), "Victor/Victoria" (1982), "That's Life!" (1986), and "Duet for One" (1986).

In 2000, Andrews was made a Dame by Queen Elizabeth II for services to the performing arts. In 2002, she was ranked #59 in the BBC's poll of the 100 Greatest Britons. In 2003, she revisited her first Broadway success, this time as a stage director, with a revival of "The Boy Friend". From 2001 to 2004, Andrews starred in "The Princess Diaries" (2001), "" (2004). From 2004 to 2010, she lent her voice to the "Shrek" animated films and "Despicable Me" (2010).

Andrews has won an Academy Award, a BAFTA, five Golden Globes, three Grammys, two Emmys, the Screen Actors Guild Lifetime Achievement Award, the Kennedy Center Honors Award, and the Disney Legends Award. Apart from her musical career, she is also an author of children's books and has published an autobiography, "" (2008).

Julia Elizabeth Wells was born on 1 October 1935 in Walton-on-Thames, Surrey, England. Her mother, Barbara Ward Wells (née Morris) (1910–1984) was born in Chertsey and married Edward Charles "Ted" Wells (1908–1990), a teacher of metalwork and woodwork in 1932. However, Andrews was conceived as a result of an affair her mother had with a family friend believed to be Alfred Westmacott, a boat builder who designed the popular XOD sailboat. Andrews discovered her true parentage from her mother in 1950, although it was not publicly disclosed until her 2008 autobiography.

With the outbreak of World War II, Barbara and Ted Wells went their separate ways and were soon divorced. They both remarried: Barbara to Ted Andrews, in 1943, and Ted Wells, in 1944, to Winifred Maud (Hyde) Birkhead, a war widow and former hairstylist working a lathe at a war work factory that employed them both in Hinchley Wood, Surrey. Ted Wells assisted with evacuating children to Surrey during the Blitz, while Barbara joined Ted Andrews in entertaining the troops through the Entertainments National Service Association (ENSA).

Andrews lived briefly with Ted Wells and her brother John in Surrey. In 1940, Ted Wells sent young Julia to live with her mother and stepfather, who, the elder Wells thought, would be better able to provide for his talented daughter's artistic training. According to her 2008 autobiography "Home", while Julie had been used to calling Ted Andrews "Uncle Ted", her mother suggested it would be more appropriate to refer to her stepfather as "Pop", while her father remained "Dad" or "Daddy" to her. Julie disliked this change.

The Andrews family was "very poor and we lived in a bad slum area of London," Andrews recalled, adding, "That was a very black period in my life." According to Andrews, her stepfather was violent and an alcoholic. Ted Andrews twice, while drunk, tried to get into bed with his stepdaughter, resulting in Andrews fitting a lock on her door. But, as the stage career of Ted and Barbara Andrews improved, they were able to afford to move to better surroundings, first to Beckenham and then, as the war ended, back to the Andrews' hometown of Hersham. The Andrews family took up residence at the Old Meuse, in West Grove, Hersham, a house (now demolished) where Andrews' maternal grandmother had served as a maid.

Andrews' stepfather sponsored lessons for her, first at the Cone-Ripman School (now known commonly as ArtsEd), an independent arts educational school in London, then with concert soprano and voice instructor Madame Lilian Stiles-Allen. "She had an enormous influence on me", Andrews said of Stiles-Allen, adding, "She was my third mother – I've got more mothers and fathers than anyone in the world." In her memoir "Julie Andrews – My Star Pupil", Stiles-Allen records: "The range, accuracy, and tone of Julie's voice amazed me ... she had possessed the rare gift of absolute pitch" (though Andrews herself refutes this in her 2008 autobiography "Home"). According to Andrews: "Madame was sure that I could do Mozart and Rossini, but, to be honest, I never was". Of her own voice, she says "I had a very pure, white, thin voice, a four-octave range – dogs would come for miles around." After Cone-Ripman School, Andrews continued her academic education at the nearby Woodbrook School, a local state school in Beckenham.

Beginning in 1945, and for the next two years, Julie Andrews performed spontaneously and unbilled on stage with her parents. "Then came the day when I was told I must go to bed in the afternoon because I was going to be allowed to sing with Mummy and Pop in the evening," Andrews explained. She would stand on a beer crate to sing into the microphone, sometimes a solo or as a duet with her stepfather, while her mother played piano. "It must have been ghastly, but it seemed to go down all right."

Julie Andrews gained her big break when her stepfather introduced her to Val Parnell, whose Moss Empires controlled prominent venues in London. Andrews made her professional solo debut at the London Hippodrome singing the difficult aria "Je suis Titania" from "Mignon" as part of a musical revue called "Starlight Roof" on 22 October 1947. She played the Hippodrome for one year. Andrews recalled: "Starlight Roof" saying, "There was this wonderful American person and comedian, Wally Boag, who made balloon animals. He would say, 'Is there any little girl or boy in the audience who would like one of these?' And I would rush up onstage and say, 'I'd like one, please.' And then he would chat to me and I'd tell him I sang... I was fortunate in that I absolutely stopped the show cold. I mean, the audience went crazy."

On 1 November 1948, Julie Andrews (aged 13) became the youngest solo performer ever to be seen in a Royal Command Variety Performance before King George VI and Queen Elizabeth at the London Palladium, where she performed along with Danny Kaye, the Nicholas Brothers, and the comedy team George and Bert Bernard.

Julie Andrews followed her parents into radio and television. She performed in musical interludes of the BBC Light Programme comedy show "Up the Pole" and later "Educating Archie", of which she was a cast member from 1950 to 1952. She reportedly made her television début on the BBC programme "RadiOlympia Showtime" on 8 October 1949.

Andrews appeared on West End theatre at the London Casino, where she played one year each as Princess Badroulbadour in "Aladdin" and the egg in "Humpty Dumpty". She also appeared on provincial stages in "Jack and the Beanstalk" and "Little Red Riding Hood", as well as starring as the lead role in "Cinderella".

In 1952, she voiced Princess Zeila in the English dub of the Italian animated movie "The Singing Princess" ("La Rosa di Bagdad", 1949), in her first film and first venture into voice-over work.

On 30 September 1954 on the eve of her 19th birthday, Julie Andrews made her Broadway debut portraying Polly Browne in the already highly successful London musical "The Boy Friend". To the critics, Andrews was the stand-out performer in the show. Near the end of her "Boy Friend" contract, as a Londoner Andrews was asked to audition for the role of Cockney flower girl Eliza Doolittle in "My Fair Lady" on Broadway and got the part. In November 1955, Andrews was signed to appear with Bing Crosby in what one source calls the first made-for-television film, "High Tor", which aired on the "Ford Star Jubilee" in March 1956.

Andrews auditioned for a part in the Richard Rodgers musical "Pipe Dream". Although Rodgers wanted her for "Pipe Dream", he advised her to take the part in the Frederick Loewe and Alan Jay Lerner musical "My Fair Lady" if it were offered to her. In 1956, she appeared on stage in "My Fair Lady" as Eliza Doolittle to Rex Harrison's Henry Higgins. Rodgers was so impressed with Andrews' talent that concurrent with her run in "My Fair Lady" she was featured in the Rodgers and Hammerstein television musical, "Cinderella".

"Cinderella" was broadcast live on CBS on 31 March 1957 under the musical direction of Alfredo Antonini and had an estimated 107 million viewers. The show was broadcast in colour from CBS Studio 72, at 2248 Broadway in New York City. Only a black-and-white kinescope remains, which has been released on DVD. Andrews was nominated for an Emmy Award for her performance.

In 1957, Andrews released her debut solo album, "The Lass with the Delicate Air", which harked back to her British music hall days. The album includes performances of English folk songs as well as the World War II anthem, "London Pride", a patriotic song written by Noël Coward in 1941 during the Blitz, which Andrews herself had survived.

Between 1956 and 1962, Andrews guest-starred on "The Ed Sullivan Show" (15 July 1956), and also appeared on "The Dinah Shore Chevy Show", "What's My Line?", "The Jack Benny Program", "The Bell Telephone Hour" and "The Garry Moore Show". In June 1962, Andrews co-starred in "Julie and Carol at Carnegie Hall", a CBS special with Carol Burnett.

In 1960, Lerner and Loewe again cast her in a period musical as Queen Guinevere in "Camelot", along with Richard Burton (as King Arthur) and newcomer Robert Goulet. However, because film studio head Jack L. Warner decided Andrews lacked sufficient name recognition for her casting in the film version of "My Fair Lady", Eliza was instead played by the established film actress Audrey Hepburn. As Warner later recalled, the decision was easy, "In my business, I have to know who brings people and their money to a cinema box office. Audrey Hepburn had never made a financial flop."

In 1963, Andrews began her work in the title role of Disney's musical film "Mary Poppins". Walt Disney had seen her performance as Queen Guinevere and thought she would be perfect for the role of the British nanny who is "practically perfect in every way!" Andrews initially declined because of pregnancy, returning to London to give birth, but Disney firmly insisted, saying, "We'll wait for you."

"Mary Poppins" became the biggest box-office draw in Disney history. Andrews won the 1964 Academy Award for Best Actress and the Golden Globe Award for Best Actress – Motion Picture Comedy or Musical for her performance. She and her co-stars also won the 1965 Grammy Award for Best Album for Children. As a measure of "sweet revenge," as "Poppins" songwriter Richard M. Sherman put it, Andrews closed her acceptance speech at the Golden Globes by saying, "And, finally, my thanks to a man who made a wonderful movie and who made all this possible in the first place, Mr. Jack Warner." "My Fair Lady" was in direct competition for the awards.
Andrews starred opposite James Garner in "The Americanization of Emily" (1964), for which she was nominated for the BAFTA Award for Best British Actress in a Leading Role. A comedy-drama war film set in London during World War II, Andrews has described it as her favourite film, a sentiment shared by her co-star Garner.

In 1965, Andrews starred in "The Sound of Music", which was the highest-grossing film of the year. It was also the biggest hit in the history of 20th Century Fox. In 2013, it was the third highest-grossing film of all time in the US, adjusted for inflation. For her performance as Maria von Trapp, Andrews won her second Golden Globe Award for Best Actress – Motion Picture Comedy or Musical. She was nominated a second time for the BAFTA Award for Best British Actress in a Leading Role and was also nominated for the Academy Award for Best Actress, though in both awards she lost to Julie Christie, for "Darling".

After completing "The Sound of Music", Andrews appeared as a guest star on the NBC-TV variety series "The Andy Williams Show". She followed this television appearance with an Emmy Award-winning special, "The Julie Andrews Show", which featured Gene Kelly and the New Christy Minstrels as guests. It aired on NBC-TV in November 1965.

In 1966, Andrews starred in "Hawaii", the second highest-grossing film of its year. Also in 1966, she starred opposite Paul Newman in "Torn Curtain", which was directed by Alfred Hitchcock. The following year, she played the title character in "Thoroughly Modern Millie" (1967), for which she received a Golden Globe nomination. At the time, "Thoroughly Modern Millie" and "Torn Curtain" were the biggest and second biggest hits in Universal Pictures history, respectively.

Andrews next appeared in two of Hollywood's most expensive flops: "Star!" (1968), a biopic of Gertrude Lawrence; and "Darling Lili" (1970), co-starring Rock Hudson and directed by her second husband, Blake Edwards. In 1970, Andrews was the first choice to play the English witch Eglantine Price in Disney's "Bedknobs and Broomsticks", with the role eventually going to Angela Lansbury.

Andrews continued working in television. In 1969, she shared the spotlight with singer Harry Belafonte for an NBC-TV special, "An Evening with Julie Andrews and Harry Belafonte". In 1971, she appeared as a guest for the Grand Opening Special of Walt Disney World, and that same year she and Carol Burnett headlined a CBS special, "Julie and Carol At Lincoln Center". In 1972–73, Andrews starred in her own television variety series, "The Julie Andrews Hour", on the ABC network. The show won seven Emmy Awards but was cancelled after one season.

Between 1973 and 1975, Andrews continued her association with ABC by headlining five variety specials for the network. She guest-starred on "The Muppet Show" in 1977, and the following year, she appeared again with the Muppets on a CBS television variety special. The programme, "Julie Andrews: One Step Into Spring", aired in March 1978, to mixed reviews and mediocre ratings. She made only two other films in the 1970s, "The Tamarind Seed" (1974) and "10" (1979).

In February 1980, Andrews headlined "Because We Care", a CBS-TV special with 30 major stars raising funds for Cambodian Famine victims through Operation California (now Operation USA, on whose Board she serves). Later that year, she starred in the film "Little Miss Marker". In 1981, she appeared in Blake Edwards' "S.O.B." (1981) in which she played Sally Miles, a character who agrees to "show my boobies" in a scene in the film-within-a-film. That was Andrews's first on-screen nude scene and got much attention as she poked fun at her own squeaky-clean image.

In 1982, Andrews played a dual role of Victoria Grant and Count Victor Grezhinski in the film "Victor/Victoria" once again playing opposite James Garner. Her performance earned her a Golden Globe Award for Best Actress – Motion Picture Comedy or Musical, as well as a nomination for the 1982 Academy Award for Best Actress, her third Oscar nomination.

In 1983, Andrews was chosen as the Hasty Pudding Woman of the Year by the Harvard University Theatrical Society. That year, she co-starred with Burt Reynolds in "The Man Who Loved Women". Her next two films were "That's Life!" and "Duet for One" (both 1986), which earned her Golden Globe nominations.
In December 1987, Andrews starred in an ABC Christmas special, "Julie Andrews: The Sound Of Christmas", which went on to win five Emmy Awards. Two years later, she was reunited for the third time with Carol Burnett for a variety special which aired on ABC in December 1989.

In 1991, Andrews made her television dramatic debut in the ABC made-for-TV film, "Our Sons", co-starring Ann-Margret. Andrews was named a Disney Legend within the year. In the summer of 1992, Andrews starred in her first television sitcom, the short-lived "Julie" aired on ABC for only seven episodes and co-starred James Farentino. In December 1992, she hosted the NBC holiday special, "Christmas In Washington".

In 1993, she starred in a limited run at the Manhattan Theatre Club in the American premiere of Stephen Sondheim's revue, "Putting It Together". Between 1994 and 1995 Andrews recorded two solo albums – the first saluted the music of Richard Rodgers and the second paid tribute to the words of Alan Jay Lerner. In 1995, she starred in the stage musical version of "Victor/Victoria". It was her first appearance in a Broadway show in 35 years. Opening on Broadway on 25 October 1995 at the Marquis Theatre, it later went on the road for a world tour. When she was the only Tony Award nominee for the production, she declined the nomination saying that she could not accept because she felt the entire production was snubbed.

Andrews was forced to quit the show towards the end of the Broadway run in 1997 when she developed hoarseness in her voice. She subsequently underwent surgery at New York's Mount Sinai Hospital to remove non-cancerous nodules from her throat. (However, Andrews has recently stated that it was due to "a certain kind of muscular striation [that] happens on the vocal cords" as a result of strain from "Victor/Victoria", adding "I didn't have cancer, I didn't have nodules, I didn't have anything.") She emerged from the surgery with permanent damage that destroyed the purity of her singing and gave a rasp to her speaking voice. In 1999 she filed a malpractice suit against the doctors at Mount Sinai Hospital, including Scott Kessler and Jeffrey Libin, who had operated on her throat. Originally, the doctors assured Andrews that she should regain her voice within six weeks, but Andrews' stepdaughter Jennifer Edwards said in 1999 "it's been two years, and it [her singing voice] still hasn't returned." The lawsuit was settled in September 2000 for an undisclosed amount.

Despite the loss of her singing voice, she kept busy with many projects. In 1998, she appeared in a stage production of "Dr. Dolittle" in London. As recounted on the Julie Andrews website, she performed the voice of Polynesia the parrot and "recorded some 700 sentences and sounds, which were placed on a computer chip that sat in the mechanical bird's mouth. In the song 'Talk to the Animals,' Polynesia the parrot even sings." The next year Andrews was reunited with James Garner for the CBS made-for-TV film, "One Special Night", which aired in November 1999.

In the 2000 New Year Honours List, Andrews was made a Dame Commander of the Order of the British Empire (DBE) for services to the performing arts by Queen Elizabeth II at Buckingham Palace. In 2002, Andrews was among the guests at the Queen's Golden Jubilee Hollywood party held at the Beverly Wilshire Hotel. She also appears at No.59 on the 2002 poll of the "100 Greatest Britons" sponsored by the BBC and chosen by the British public.

In 2001, Andrews received Kennedy Center Honors. The same year, she reunited with "Sound of Music" co-star Christopher Plummer in a live television performance of "On Golden Pond" (an adaptation of the 1979 play).

In 2001, Andrews appeared in "The Princess Diaries", her first Disney film since "Mary Poppins" (1964). She starred as Queen Clarisse Marie Renaldi and reprised the role in a sequel, "" (2004). In "The Princess Diaries 2", Andrews sang on film for the first time since having throat surgery. The song, "Your Crowning Glory" (a duet with teen idol Raven-Symoné), was set in a limited range of an octave to accommodate her recovering voice. The film's music supervisor, Dawn Soler, recalled that Andrews "nailed the song on the first take. I looked around and I saw grips with tears in their eyes."

Andrews continued her association with Disney when she appeared as the nanny in two television films based on the Eloise books, a series of children's books by Kay Thompson about a child who lives in the Plaza Hotel in New York City. "Eloise at the Plaza" premiered in April 2003, and "Eloise at Christmastime" was broadcast in November 2003; Andrews was nominated for an Emmy Award. The same year she made her debut as a theatre director, directing a revival of "The Boy Friend", the musical in which she made her 1954 Broadway debut, at the Bay Street Theatre in Sag Harbor, New York. Her production, which featured costume and scenic design by her former husband Tony Walton, was remounted at the Goodspeed Opera House in 2005 and went on a national tour in 2006.

From 2005 to 2006, Andrews served as the Official Ambassador for Disneyland's 18-month-long, 50th-anniversary celebration, the "Happiest Homecoming on Earth", travelling to promote the celebration, and recording narration and appearing at several events at the park. On 17 March 2005, Andrews appeared onstage during the curtain calls for the musical of "Mary Poppins" at the Prince Edward Theatre in London's West End, where she gave a speech recalling her own memories from making the film and praised the cast for their new interpretation.

In 2004, Andrews performed the voice of Queen Lillian in the animated blockbuster "Shrek 2" (2004), reprising the role for its sequels, "Shrek the Third" (2007) and "Shrek Forever After" (2010). Later, in 2007, she narrated "Enchanted", a live-action Disney musical comedy that both poked fun at and paid homage to classic Disney films such as "Mary Poppins".

In January 2007, Andrews was honoured with the Lifetime Achievement Award at the Screen Actors Guild's awards and stated that her goals included continuing to direct for the stage and possibly to produce her own Broadway musical. She published "", which she characterised as "part one" of her autobiography, on 1 April 2008. "Home" chronicles her early years in Britain's music hall circuit and ends in 1962 with her winning the role of Mary Poppins. For a Walt Disney video release, she again portrayed Mary Poppins and narrated the story of "The Cat That Looked at a King" in 2004.

In July through early August 2008, Andrews hosted "Julie Andrews' The Gift of Music", a short tour of the United States where she sang various Rodgers and Hammerstein songs and symphonised her recently published book, "Simeon's Gift". These were her first public singing performances in a dozen years, due to her failed vocal cord surgery.

In January 2009, Andrews was named on "The Times"’ list of the top 10 British Actresses of all time. The list included Helen Mirren, Helena Bonham Carter, Judi Dench, and Audrey Hepburn. On 8 May 2009, Andrews received the honorary George and Ira Gershwin Award for Lifetime Achievement in Music at the annual UCLA Spring Sing competition in Pauley Pavilion.

In January 2010, Andrews was the official United States presenter for the Great Performances "From Vienna: The New Year's Celebration 2010" concert. This was her second appearance in this role, after presenting the previous year's concert. Andrews also had a supporting role in the film "Tooth Fairy", which opened to unfavourable reviews although the box office receipts were successful. On her promotion tour for the film, she also spoke of "Operation USA" and the aid campaign to the Haiti disaster.

On 8 May 2010, Andrews made her London comeback after a 21-year absence (her last performance there was a Christmas concert at the Royal Festival Hall in 1989). She performed at The O2 Arena, accompanied by the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra and an ensemble of five performers. Earlier (on 15 December 2009 and on many other occasions), she appeared on British television saying that rumours that she would be singing at the performance were not true and that she would be doing a form of "speak singing". Yet she actually sang two solos and several duets and ensemble pieces. The evening, though well received by the 20,000 fans present, who gave her standing ovation after standing ovation, did not convince the critics.

On 18 May 2010, Andrews' 23rd book (this one also written with her daughter Emma) was published. In June 2010 the book, entitled "The Very Fairy Princess", reached number 1 on "the New York Times" Best Seller List for Children's Books. On 21 May 2010, her film "Shrek Forever After" was released; in it Andrews reprises her role as the Queen. On 9 July 2010, "Despicable Me", an animated film in which Andrews lent her voice to Marlena Gru, the thoughtless and soul-crushing mother of the main character Gru (voiced by Steve Carell), opened to rave reviews and strong box office.

On 28 October 2010, Andrews appeared, along with the actors who portrayed the cinematic von Trapp family members, on "Oprah" to commemorate the film's 45th anniversary. A few days later, her 24th book, "Little Bo in Italy", was published. On 15 December 2010, Andrews' husband Blake Edwards died at the age of 88, of complications of pneumonia at the Saint John's Health Center in Santa Monica, California. Andrews was by her husband's side when he died.

In February 2011, Andrews received a Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award and, with her daughter Emma, a Grammy for best spoken-word album for children (for "A Collection of Poems, Songs and Lullabies"), at the 53rd Grammy Awards.

At the age of 77, Andrews undertook her first tour of Australia and New Zealand in 2013, hosted by Nicholas Hammond who was a boy of 14 when they appeared together in "The Sound of Music". In place of singing, she planned a series of speaking engagements in Australia's five mainland state capitals. There were security concerns surrounding the event at New Zealand. The following year she took the same show on a tour of England, culminating in two shows in London.

In 2015, Andrews made a surprise appearance at the Oscars, greeting Lady Gaga who paid her homage by singing a medley from "The Sound of Music". This became a social media sensation, trending all over the world. Lyndon Terracini announced in August 2015 that Andrews will direct "My Fair Lady" in 2016 for Opera Australia at the Sydney Opera House.

In 2016, Andrews created the preschool television series "Julie's Greenroom" with her daughter, Emma Walton Hamilton and Judy Rothman. Andrews is joined by her assistant Gus (Giullian Yao Gioiello) and “Greenies,” a cast of original puppets built by The Jim Henson Company. The series premiered on Netflix in 2017. In 2017, Andrews also reprised her role as Marlena Gru in the second "Despicable Me" sequel "Despicable Me 3".

Andrews has been married twice, first to set designer Tony Walton from 1959 until 1967, then to director Blake Edwards from 1969 until his death in 2010.

Andrews married Walton on 10 May 1959 in Weybridge, Surrey. They had first met in 1948 when Andrews was appearing at the London Casino in the show "Humpty Dumpty". Andrews and Walton headed back to London in September 1962 to await the birth of daughter Emma Katherine Walton, who was born in London two months later.

Andrews married Edwards in 1969; his children from a previous marriage, Jennifer and Geoffrey, were 3 and 5 years older than Emma, Andrews' daughter with Tony Walton. In the 1970s, Edwards and Andrews adopted two daughters; Amy in 1974 and Joanna in 1975. Andrews is a grandmother to nine and great-grandmother to three.

Termed "Britain’s Youngest Prima Donna", Andrews' classically trained soprano, lauded for its "pure and clear" sound, has been described as light, bright and operatic in tone. When a young Andrews was taken by her parents to be examined by a throat specialist, the doctor concluded that she had "an almost adult larynx." In spite of the fact that her voice teacher, English soprano Lilian Stiles-Allen, continually encouraged her to pursue opera, Andrews herself felt that her voice was unsuited for the genre and "too big a stretch for [her]". At the time, Andrews described her own voice as "extremely high and thin", feeling that it lacked "the necessary guts and weight for opera", preferring musical theatre instead. As Andrews aged, so did her voice, which began to naturally deepen. Losing her vast upper register, her "top notes" became increasingly difficult to sing while "her middle register matured into the warm golden tone" for which she has become known, according to Tim Wong of "The Daily Telegraph".

Musically, Andrews had always preferred singing music that was "bright and sunny", choosing to avoid songs that were sad, depressing, upsetting, or written in a minor key, for fear of losing her voice "in a mess of emotion". She cited this as yet another reason for avoiding opera.

†Mrs Andrews declined the nomination for her role in "Victor/Victoria" citing that she felt that the rest of the company had been overlooked

Andrews has received many honorary degrees in recognition of her distinguished career in entertainment. These include:

Andrews has published several books (mainly children's books and also autobiographies) under her name, as well as the pen names Julie Andrews Edwards and Julie Edwards.



</doc>
<doc id="67375" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=67375" title="Jennifer Jones">
Jennifer Jones

Jennifer Jones (born Phylis Lee Isley; March 2, 1919 – December 17, 2009), also known as Jennifer Jones Simon, was an American actress during Hollywood's golden years. Jones, who won the Academy Award for Best Actress for her performance in "The Song of Bernadette" (1943), was also Academy Award-nominated for her performances in four other films. She was married three times, most notably to film producer David O. Selznick.

Jones starred in more than 20 films over a 30-year career, but she went into semi-retirement following Selznick's death in 1965. In 1980, she founded the Jennifer Jones Simon Foundation for Mental Health and Education four years after her daughter's suicide. In later life, Jones withdrew from public life to live in quiet retirement with her son and his family in Malibu, California.

Jones was born Phylis Lee Isley in Tulsa, Oklahoma, the daughter of Flora Mae (née Suber) and Phillip Ross Isley. An only child, she was raised Roman Catholic. Her parents toured the Midwest in a traveling tent show that they owned and operated. She attended Monte Cassino, a girls' school and junior college in Tulsa and then Northwestern University in Illinois, where she was a member of Kappa Alpha Theta sorority, before transferring to the American Academy of Dramatic Arts in New York City in 1938. It was there that she met and fell in love with fellow acting student Robert Walker. The couple married on January 2, 1939.

Isley and Walker returned to Tulsa for a 13-week radio program, arranged by her father, and then made their way to Hollywood. Isley landed two small roles, first in a 1939 John Wayne Western titled "New Frontier", followed by a serial entitled "Dick Tracy's G-Men". She failed a screen test for Paramount Pictures and decided to return to New York City.

While Walker found steady work in radio programs, Isley worked part-time modeling hats for the Powers Agency while looking for possible acting jobs. When she learned of auditions for the lead role in "Claudia", Rose Franken's hit play, she presented herself to David O. Selznick's New York office but fled in tears after what she thought was a bad reading. However, Selznick had overheard her audition and was impressed enough to have his secretary call her back. Following an interview, she was signed to a seven-year contract.
She was carefully groomed for stardom and given a new name: Jennifer Jones. Director Henry King was impressed by her screen test as Bernadette Soubirous for "The Song of Bernadette" (1943) and she won the coveted role over hundreds of applicants. In 1944, on her 25th birthday, Jones won the Academy Award for Best Actress for her performance as Bernadette Soubirous.
Over the next two decades, Jones appeared in a wide range of roles selected by Selznick. Her dark beauty and sensitive nature appealed to audiences and she projected a variable range. Her initial saintly image — as shown in her first starring role — was a stark contrast three years later when she was cast as a provocative bi-racial woman in Selznick’s controversial film "Duel in the Sun" (1946). Other notable films included "Since You Went Away" (1944), "Love Letters" (1945), "Cluny Brown" (1946), "Portrait of Jennie" (1948), "Madame Bovary" (1949), "We Were Strangers" (1949), "Gone to Earth" (1950), "Carrie" (1952), "Ruby Gentry" (also 1952), "Terminal Station" (1953; later released as "Indiscretion of an American Wife"), "Beat the Devil" (1953), "Love Is a Many-Splendored Thing" (1955), "Good Morning, Miss Dove" (also 1955), "The Man in the Gray Flannel Suit" (1956) starring opposite Gregory Peck and "A Farewell to Arms" (1957). The portrait of Jones for the film "Portrait of Jennie" was painted by Robert Brackman.

Her last big-screen appearance came in the disaster film "The Towering Inferno" (1974). Her performance earned her a Golden Globe nomination for Best Supporting Actress. Early scenes in the film showed paintings lent to the production by the art gallery of Jones' husband Norton Simon.

Jones had two sons from her first marriage, Robert Walker Jr. (b. 1940) and Michael Walker (1941–2007). Both later became actors. Robert was the only child of Jones' three children who would not die before her. Jones had an affair with film producer David O. Selznick. She separated from Walker in November 1943, co-starred with him in "Since You Went Away" (1944), and divorced him in June 1945.

Jones married Selznick on July 13, 1949, a union that lasted until his death at age 63 on June 22, 1965. After his death, she semi-retired from acting. According to media reports, Jones attempted suicide in November 1967 after hearing of the death of close friend Charles Bickford. She was found unconscious at the base of a cliff overlooking Malibu Beach; she was hospitalized in a coma before eventually recovering.

On May 29, 1971, Jones married her third husband, multi-millionaire industrialist, art collector and philanthropist Norton Simon, whose son Robert had committed suicide in 1969. The marriage took place aboard a tugboat five miles off the English coast, and was conducted by Unitarian minister Eirion Phillips. Years before, Simon had attempted to buy the portrait of her that was used in the film "Portrait of Jennie". Simon later met Jones at a party hosted by fellow industrialist and art collector Walter Annenberg.

Jones' daughter with Selznick, Mary Jennifer Selznick (1954–1976), committed suicide by jumping from a 20th-floor window in Los Angeles on May 11, 1976. This led to Jones' interest in mental health issues. In 1980, she founded the Jennifer Jones Simon Foundation For Mental Health and Education. The Foundation pledged $400,000 to be used exclusively for the world-renowned Mary Jennifer Selznick Workshop Program, named in honor of Jones's late daughter.

Four years before his death in June 1993, Simon resigned as President of Norton Simon Museum in Pasadena and Jennifer Jones Simon was appointed Chairman of the Board of Trustees, President and Executive Officer. In 1996, she began working with architect Frank Gehry and landscape designer Nancy Goslee Power on renovating the museum and gardens. She remained active as the director of the Norton Simon Museum until 2003, when she was given emeritus status. 

Jones was a breast cancer survivor.

Jones enjoyed a quiet retirement, living with her son Robert Walker Jr. and his family in Malibu for the last six years of her life. She granted no interviews and rarely appeared in public. Jones participated in Gregory Peck's AFI Life Achievement Award ceremony in 1989 and appeared at the 70th (1998) and 75th (2003) Academy Awards as part of the shows' tributes to past Oscar winners.

She died of natural causes on December 17, 2009, at age 90. She was cremated and her ashes were interred with her second husband in the Selznick private room at the Forest Lawn Memorial Park in Glendale, California.




</doc>
<doc id="44569" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44569" title="Helen Hunt">
Helen Hunt

Helen Elizabeth Hunt (born June 15, 1963) is an American actress, director, and screenwriter. She starred in the sitcom "Mad About You" for seven years, and played single mother Carol Connelly in the 1997 romantic comedy film "As Good as It Gets", for which she won the Academy Award for Best Actress. 

Some of her other notable films include "Twister" (1996), "Cast Away" (2000), "What Women Want" (2000), "Pay It Forward" (2000), and "The Sessions" (2012). Hunt's performance in "The Sessions" garnered her a second Academy Award nomination. She made her directorial debut in 2007 with "Then She Found Me" (2007). Hunt has also won four Emmy Awards, four Golden Globe Awards, and two Screen Actors Guild Awards.

Hunt was born in Culver City, California. Her mother, Jane Elizabeth (née Novis), worked as a photographer, and her father, Gordon Hunt, was a film, voice and stage director and acting coach. Her uncle, Peter H. Hunt, is also a director. Her maternal grandmother, Dorothy (Anderson) Fries, was a voice coach. Hunt's paternal grandmother was from a German Jewish family, while Hunt's other grandparents were of English descent (her maternal grandfather was born in England), with a Methodist religious background. When she was three, Hunt's family moved to New York City, where her father directed theatre and Hunt attended plays as a child several times a week. Hunt studied ballet, and briefly attended UCLA.

Hunt began working as a child actress in the 1970s. Her early roles included an appearance as Murray Slaughter's daughter on "The Mary Tyler Moore Show", alongside Lindsay Wagner in an episode of "The Bionic Woman", an appearance in an episode of "Ark II" called "Omega", and a regular role in the television series "The Swiss Family Robinson". She appeared as a marijuana-smoking classmate on an episode of "The Facts of Life". Hunt also played a young woman who, while on PCP, jumps out of a second-story window, in a 1982 TV movie called "Desperate Lives" (a scene which she mocked during a "Saturday Night Live" monologue in 1994). That same year, Hunt was cast on the ABC sitcom "It Takes Two", which lasted a single season. She played Jennie in the 1983 television movie "", co-starring Mickey Rooney and, later that year, was cast in the lead role of Tami Maida in the fact-based TV movie "Quarterback Princess". In the mid-1980s, she had a recurring role on "St. Elsewhere" as Clancy Williams, the girlfriend of Dr. Jack "Boomer" Morrison, and had a notable guest appearance as a cancer-stricken mother-to-be in a two-part episode of "Highway to Heaven". Feature film roles around this time included "Girls Just Want to Have Fun" (1985) with Sarah Jessica Parker and Shannen Doherty, "Peggy Sue Got Married" (1986) as Kathleen Turner's daughter, "Project X" (1987) with Matthew Broderick, and "Stealing Home" (1988) as Hope Wyatt, the sister of Billy Wyatt, played by Mark Harmon and an all-star cast featuring Jodie Foster, Blair Hunt and Harold Ramis, and "Next of Kin" (1989) with Patrick Swayze and Liam Neeson.

In the 1990s, after playing the lead female role in the short-lived "My Life and Times", Hunt starred in the series "Mad About You", winning Emmy Awards for her performances in 1996, 1997, 1998, and 1999. For the last year of the show she and Paul Reiser became the first actors ever to be paid $1,000,000 per episode. Hunt directed several episodes of "Mad About You", including the series finale. Her big-screen directorial debut came with the film "Then She Found Me", in which she also starred, with Colin Firth and Matthew Broderick. She starred with Bill Paxton in the 1996 disaster action film "Twister", which was the second-highest-grossing film of the year. In 1998, Hunt won an Academy Award for Best Actress for her role in the movie "As Good as It Gets" of a waitress and single mother who finds herself falling in love with a misanthropic obsessive-compulsive romance novelist played by Jack Nicholson. After winning the Academy Award, she took time off from movie work to play Viola in Shakespeare's "Twelfth Night", at Lincoln Center in New York. In 2000, Hunt starred in four films: "Dr. T & the Women", with Richard Gere; "Pay It Forward", with Kevin Spacey and Haley Joel Osment; "What Women Want", with Mel Gibson; and "Cast Away", with Tom Hanks. In 2003, she returned to Broadway in Yasmina Reza's "Life x 3". In 2006, Hunt appeared in the ensemble cast film "Bobby" alongside Demi Moore, Anthony Hopkins, Sharon Stone and William H. Macy. In 2011, in the movie "Soul Surfer", she played the mother of the Hawaiian-born champion surfer Bethany Hamilton, on whose life the movie was based.
In 2012, she starred alongside John Hawkes and William H. Macy in "The Sessions" as sex surrogate Cheryl Cohen-Greene. The movie and her performance were very well reviewed and earned her several award nominations, including an Oscar nomination for Best Supporting Actress. The movie also gained two awards at the Sundance Film Festival.

She owns a production company with Connie Tavel, Hunt/Tavel Productions under Sony Pictures Entertainment.

Hunt started dating actor Hank Azaria in 1994. They married in 1999, only to divorce 17 months later. She was partnered with producer/writer/director Matthew Carnahan starting in 2001. They have a daughter, Makena Lei Gordon Carnahan, born on May 13, 2004. In August 2017, the couple split after 16 years of dating.

Hunt was one of the demonstrators at the 2017 Women's March held on January 21, 2017, in Washington, D.C.

Hunt has been recognized extensively in her career. In 1998 she won a Golden Globe Award, an Academy Award and an Emmy Award. Hunt was nominated for an Emmy Award for lead actress in a comedy seven years in a row, from 1993 through 1999, winning in the last four years.



</doc>
<doc id="45969" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45969" title="Joan Crawford">
Joan Crawford

Joan Crawford (born Lucille Fay LeSueur; March 23, c. 1904 – May 10, 1977) was an American film and television actress who began her career as a dancer and stage showgirl. In 1999, the American Film Institute ranked Crawford tenth on its list of the greatest female stars of Classic Hollywood Cinema.

Beginning her career as a dancer in traveling theatrical companies, before debuting as a chorus girl on Broadway, Crawford signed a motion picture contract with Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer in 1925. In the 1930s, Crawford's fame rivaled, and later outlasted, MGM colleagues Norma Shearer and Greta Garbo. Crawford often played hard-working young women who find romance and success. These stories were well received by Depression-era audiences and were popular with women. Crawford became one of Hollywood's most prominent movie stars and one of the highest-paid women in the United States, but her films began losing money and, by the end of the 1930s, she was labelled "box office poison". But her career gradually improved in the early 1940s, and she made a major comeback in 1945 by starring in "Mildred Pierce", for which she won the Academy Award for Best Actress. She would go on to receive Best Actress nominations for "Possessed" (1947) and "Sudden Fear" (1952). She continued to act in film and television throughout the 1950s and 1960s; she achieved box office success with the highly successful horror film "Whatever Happened To Baby Jane?" (1962), in which she starred alongside Bette Davis, her long-time rival.

In 1955, Crawford became involved with the Pepsi-Cola Company through her marriage to company Chairman Alfred Steele. After his death in 1959, Crawford was elected to fill his vacancy on the board of directors, serving until she was forcibly retired in 1973. After the release of the British horror film "Trog" in 1970, Crawford retired from the screen. Following a public appearance in 1974, after which unflattering photographs were published, Crawford withdrew from public life and became increasingly reclusive until her death in 1977.

Crawford married four times. Her first three marriages ended in divorce; the last ended with the death of husband Alfred Steele. She adopted five children, one of whom was reclaimed by his birth mother. Crawford's relationships with her two elder children, Christina and Christopher, were acrimonious. Crawford disinherited the two, and, after Crawford's death, Christina wrote a well-known "tell-all" memoir titled "Mommie Dearest" (1978).

Born Lucille Fay LeSueur in San Antonio, Texas, the youngest and third child of Anna Bell (Johnson) and Thomas E. LeSueur, a laundry laborer. She was of English, French Huguenot, Swedish, and Irish ancestry. Crawford's elder siblings were sister Daisy LeSueur, who died before Lucille's birth, and brother Hal LeSueur.

Crawford's father abandoned the family a few months before her birth, reappearing later in 1930 in Abilene, Texas, reportedly working as a construction laborer. Following LeSueur's departure from the family home, Crawford's mother married Henry J. Cassin. The marriage is listed in the census as Crawford's mother's first marriage. Crawford lived with her mother, stepfather, and siblings in Lawton, Oklahoma. There, Cassin, a minor impresario, ran the Ramsey Opera House; he managed to book diverse and noted performers such as Anna Pavlova and Eva Tanguay. At that time, Crawford was reportedly unaware that Cassin, whom she called "daddy", was not her biological father until her brother Hal told her the truth. Cassin reportedly began sexually abusing her when she was eleven years old; the abuse continued until she went away to St. Agnes Academy, a Catholic school. Crawford preferred the nickname "Billie" as a child and enjoyed watching vaudeville acts perform on the stage of her stepfather's theatre. Because the family's instability negatively affected Crawford's childhood, her schooling never formally progressed beyond elementary school.

Beginning in childhood, Crawford's ambition was to be a dancer. One day, however, in an attempt to escape piano lessons so she could play with friends, she leapt from the front porch of her home and cut her foot severely on a broken milk bottle. As a result, she underwent three surgeries to repair the damage. She was unable to attend elementary school or continue with dancing lessons for 18 months.

While still residing in Lawton, Crawford's stepfather was accused of embezzlement. Although he was acquitted in court, he was blacklisted in Lawton, and the family moved to Kansas City, Missouri, around 1916. Following their relocation, Cassin, a Catholic, placed Crawford at St. Agnes Academy in Kansas City. When her mother and stepfather separated, she remained at St. Agnes as a work student, where she spent far more time working, primarily cooking and cleaning, than studying.

She later attended Rockingham Academy, also as a working student. While attending there, she began dating and had her first serious relationship, with a trumpet player named Ray Sterling. Sterling reportedly inspired her to begin challenging herself academically.

In 1922, she registered at Stephens College in Columbia, Missouri, giving her year of birth as 1906. She attended Stephens for only a few months before withdrawing after she realized she was not prepared for college.

Under the name Lucille LeSueur, Crawford began dancing in the choruses of traveling revues and was spotted dancing in Detroit by producer Jacob J. Shubert. Shubert put her in the chorus line for his 1924 show, "Innocent Eyes", at the Winter Garden Theatre on Broadway in New York City. While appearing in "Innocent Eyes" Crawford met a saxophone player named James Welton. The two were allegedly married in 1924 and lived together for several months, although this supposed marriage was never mentioned in later life by Crawford.

Crawford wanted additional work, and approached Loews Theaters publicist Nils Granlund. Granlund secured a position for her with singer Harry Richman's act and arranged for her to do a screen test which he sent to producer Harry Rapf in Hollywood. Stories have persisted that Crawford further supplemented her income by appearing in one or more stag, or soft-core pornographic, films, although this has been disputed.

Rapf notified Granlund on December 24, 1924, that Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer (MGM) had offered Crawford a contract at $75 a week. Granlund immediately wired LeSueur, who had returned to her mother's home in Kansas City, with the news; she borrowed $400 for travel expenses. She departed Kansas City on December 26, 1924 and arrived in Culver City, California on January 1, 1925.

Credited as Lucille LeSueur, her first film was "Lady of the Night" in 1925, as the body double for MGM's most popular female star, Norma Shearer. She also appeared in "The Circle" and "Pretty Ladies" (both 1925), starring comedian ZaSu Pitts. This was soon followed by equally small and unbilled roles in two other 1925 successes, "The Only Thing" and "The Merry Widow".

MGM publicity head Pete Smith recognized her ability to become a major star, but felt her name sounded fake; he told studio head Louis B. Mayer that her last name—LeSueur—reminded him of a sewer. Smith organized a contest called "Name the Star" in "Movie Weekly" to allow readers to select her new stage name. The initial choice was "Joan Arden" but, after another actress was found to have prior claim to that name, the alternate surname "Crawford" became the choice. Crawford later said that she wanted her first name to be pronounced "Jo-Anne", and that she hated the name Crawford because it sounded like "craw fish", but also admitted she "liked the security" that went with the name.

Growing increasingly frustrated over the size and quality of the parts she was given, Crawford embarked on a campaign of self-promotion. As MGM screenwriter Frederica Sagor Maas recalled, "No one decided to make Joan Crawford a star. Joan Crawford became a star because Joan Crawford decided to become a star." She began attending dances in the afternoons and evenings at hotels around Hollywood, where she often won dance competitions with her performances of the Charleston and the Black Bottom.

Her strategy worked, and MGM cast her in the film where she first made an impression on audiences, Edmund Goulding's "Sally, Irene and Mary" (1925). From the beginning of her career, Crawford considered Norma Shearer—the studio's most-popular actress—her professional nemesis. Shearer was married to MGM Head of Production Irving Thalberg; hence, she had the first choice of scripts and had more control than other stars in what films she would and would not make. Crawford was quoted to have said: "How can I compete with Norma? She sleeps with the boss!"

In 1926, Crawford was named one of the WAMPAS Baby Stars along with Mary Astor, Dolores del Río, Janet Gaynor, and Fay Wray among others. That same year, she starred in "Paris", co-starring Charles Ray. Within a few years, she became the romantic female lead to many of MGM's top male stars, including Ramón Novarro, John Gilbert, William Haines, and Tim McCoy.

Crawford appeared in "The Unknown" (1927), starring Lon Chaney, Sr. who played a carnival knife thrower with no arms. Crawford played his skimpily-clad young carnival assistant whom he hopes to marry. She stated that she learned more about acting from watching Chaney work than from anyone else in her career. "It was then," she said, "I became aware for the first time of the difference between standing in front of a camera, and acting." Also in 1927, she appeared alongside her close friend, William Haines, in "Spring Fever", which was the first of three movies the duo made together.

In 1928, Crawford starred opposite Ramón Novarro in "Across to Singapore", but it was her role as Diana Medford in "Our Dancing Daughters" (1928) that catapulted her to stardom. The role established her as a symbol of modern 1920s-style femininity which rivaled Clara Bow, the original It girl, then Hollywood's foremost flapper. A stream of hits followed "Our Dancing Daughters", including two more flapper-themed movies, in which Crawford embodied for her legion of fans (many of whom were women) an idealized vision of the free-spirited, all-American girl.

F. Scott Fitzgerald wrote of Crawford:
On June 3, 1929, Crawford married Douglas Fairbanks, Jr. at Saint Malachy's Roman Catholic Church (known as "The Actors' Chapel" owing to its proximity to Broadway theatres) in Manhattan, although neither was Catholic. Fairbanks was the son of Douglas Fairbanks and the stepson of Mary Pickford, who were considered Hollywood royalty. Fairbanks Sr. and Pickford were opposed to the marriage and did not invite the couple to their home, Pickfair, for eight months after the marriage.

The relationship between Crawford and Fairbanks, Sr. eventually warmed; she called him "Uncle Doug" and he called her "Billie", her old childhood nickname. She and Pickford, however, continued to despise each other. Following that first invitation, Crawford and Fairbanks, Jr. became more frequent guests. While the Fairbanks men played golf together, however, Crawford was left either with Pickford, who would retire to her quarters, or simply left alone.

To rid herself of her Southwestern accent, Crawford tirelessly practiced diction and elocution. She said:

After the release of "The Jazz Singer" in 1927—the first feature-length film with some audible dialog—sound films, or talkies as they became nicknamed, were all the rage. The transition from silent to sound panicked many—if not all—involved with the film industry; many silent film stars found themselves unemployable because of their undesirable voices and hard-to-understand accents or simply because of their refusal to make the transition to talkies. Many studios and stars avoided making the transition as long as possible, especially MGM, which was the last studio to switch over to sound. "The Hollywood Revue of 1929" (1929) was one of the studio's first all-talking films, and their first attempt to showcase their stars' ability to make the transition from silent to sound. Crawford was among the dozen or more MGM stars included in the movie; she sang the song "Got a Feeling for You" during the film's first act.

Crawford made a successful transition to talkies. Her first starring role in an all-talking feature-length film was in "Untamed" in 1929, co-starring Robert Montgomery. Despite the success of the film at the box office, it received mixed reviews from critics, who noted that while Crawford seemed nervous at making the transition to sound, also noted that she had become one of the most popular actresses in the world.

"Montana Moon" (1930), an uneasy mix of Western clichés and music, teamed her with John Mack Brown and Ricardo Cortez. Although the film had problems with censors, it was a major success at the time of its release. "Our Blushing Brides" (1930), co-starring Robert Montgomery and Anita Page, was the final installment in the so-called "Our Dancing Daughters" franchise. It was a greater success–both critically and financially–than her previous talkies, and became one of her personal favorites.

Her next movie, "Paid" (1930), paired her with Robert Armstrong and was another success. During the early sound era, MGM began to place Crawford in more sophisticated roles, rather than continuing to promote her flapper-inspired persona of the silent era.

In 1931, MGM cast Crawford in five films. Three of them teamed her opposite the studio's biggest male star and King of Hollywood, Clark Gable. "Dance, Fools, Dance", released in February 1931, was the first pairing of Crawford and Gable. Their second movie together, "Laughing Sinners", released in May 1931, was directed by Harry Beaumont and also co-starred Neil Hamilton. "Possessed", their third film together, released in October, was directed by Clarence Brown.

These films were immensely popular with audiences, and were generally well received by critics, stapling Crawford's position as one of MGM's top female stars of the decade, along with Norma Shearer, Greta Garbo, and Jean Harlow. Her only other notable film of 1931, "This Modern Age", was released in August, and despite unfavorable reviews, was a moderate success.

MGM next cast her in the film "Grand Hotel", directed by Edmund Goulding. As the studio's first all-star production, Crawford co-starred opposite Greta Garbo, John and Lionel Barrymore, and Wallace Beery among others. Receiving third billing, she played the middle-class stenographer to Beery's controlling general director. Crawford later admitted to being nervous during the filming of the movie because she was working with "very big stars", and that she was disappointed that she had no scenes with the "divine Garbo". "Grand Hotel" was released in April 1932 to critical and commercial success. It was one of the highest-grossing movies of the year, and won the Academy Award for Best Picture.

Crawford achieved continued success in "Letty Lynton" (1932). Soon after this movie's release, a plagiarism suit forced MGM to withdraw it. For many years it was never shown on television nor made available on home video and is therefore considered the "lost" Crawford film. The gown with large ruffled sleeves, designed by Adrian, which Crawford wore in the movie, became a popular style that same year, and was even copied by Macy's.

On a loan out to United Artists, she played prostitute Sadie Thompson in "Rain" (1932), a film version of John Colton's 1923 play. Actress Jeanne Eagels played the role on stage and Gloria Swanson had originated the part on screen in the 1928 film version. Crawford's performance was panned and the film was not a success.

Despite the failure of "Rain", in 1932 the publishing of the first "Top Ten Money Making Stars Poll" placed Crawford third in popularity at the box office, behind only Marie Dressler and Janet Gaynor. She remained on the list for the next several years, last appearing on it in 1936. In May 1933, Crawford divorced Fairbanks. Crawford cited "grievous mental cruelty", claiming Fairbanks had "a jealous and suspicious attitude" toward her friends and that they had "loud arguments about the most trivial subjects" lasting "far into the night".

Following her divorce, she was again teamed with Clark Gable, along with Franchot Tone and Fred Astaire, in the hit "Dancing Lady" (1933), in which she received top billing. She next played the title role in "Sadie McKee" (1934) opposite Tone and Gene Raymond. She was paired with Gable for the fifth time in "Chained" (1934) and for the sixth time in "Forsaking All Others" (1934). Crawford's films of this era were some of the most-popular and highest-grossing films of the mid-1930s.

In 1935, Crawford married Franchot Tone, a stage actor from New York who planned to use his film earnings to finance his theatre group. The couple built a small theatre at Crawford's Brentwood home and put on productions of classic plays for select groups of friends. Tone and Crawford had first appeared together in "Today We Live" (1933) but Crawford was hesitant about entering into another romance so soon after her split from Fairbanks.

Before and during their marriage, Crawford worked to promote Tone's Hollywood career, but Tone was ultimately not interested in being a movie star and Crawford eventually wearied of the effort. After Tone reportedly began drinking and becoming physically abusive, she filed for divorce, which was granted in 1939. Crawford and Tone much later rekindled their friendship and Tone even proposed in 1964 that they remarry. When he died in 1968, Crawford arranged for him to be cremated and his ashes scattered at Muskoka Lakes, Canada.

Crawford continued her reign as a popular movie actress well into the mid-1930s. "No More Ladies" (1935) co-starred Robert Montgomery and then-husband Franchot Tone, and was a success. Crawford had long pleaded with MGM's head Louis B. Mayer to cast her in more dramatic roles, and although he was reluctant, he cast her in the sophisticated comedy-drama "I Live My Life" (1935), directed by W.S. Van Dyke. It was well received by critics and made a larger profit than the studio had expected.

She next starred in "The Gorgeous Hussy" (1936), opposite Robert Taylor and Lionel Barrymore as well as Tone, a critical and box office success, become one of Crawford's biggest hits of the decade. "Love on the Run" (1936), a romantic comedy directed by W.S. Van Dyke, was her seventh film co-starring Clark Gable. It was, at the time of its release, called "a lot of happy nonsense" by critics, but a financial success nonetheless.

Even though Crawford remained a respected MGM actress and her films still earned profits, her popularity declined in the late 1930s. In 1937, Crawford was proclaimed the first "Queen of the Movies" by "Life" magazine. She unexpectedly slipped from seventh to sixteenth place at the box office that year, and her public popularity also began to wane. Richard Boleslawski's comedy-drama "The Last of Mrs. Cheyney" (1937) teamed her opposite William Powell in their sole screen pairing. The film was also Crawford's last box-office success before the onset of her "Box-Office Poison" period.
She co-starred opposite Franchot Tone for the seventh and final time in "The Bride Wore Red" (1937). The film was generally unfavorably reviewed by the majority of critics, with one critic calling it the "same ole rags-to-riches story" Crawford had been making for years. It also ran a financial loss, becoming one of MGM's biggest failures of the year. "Mannequin" did, as the "New York Times" stated, "restore Crawford to her throne as queen of the working girls". Most other reviews were positive, and the film managed to generate a minor profit, but it did not resurrect Crawford's popularity.

On May 3, 1938, Crawford — along with Greta Garbo, Norma Shearer, Luise Rainer, and John Barrymore, Katharine Hepburn, Fred Astaire, Dolores del Río and others — was dubbed "Box Office Poison" in an open letter in the "Independent Film Journal". The list was submitted by Harry Brandt, president of the Independent Theatre Owners Association of America. Brandt stated that while these stars had "unquestioned" dramatic abilities, their high salaries did not reflect in their ticket sales, thus hurting the movie exhibitors involved. Her follow-up movie, "The Shining Hour" (1938), co-starring Margaret Sullavan and Melvyn Douglas, was well received by critics, but it was a box office flop.

She made a comeback in 1939 with her role as home-wrecker Crystal Allen in "The Women" opposite her professional nemesis, Norma Shearer. A year later, she played against type, playing the unglamorous role of Julie in "Strange Cargo" (1940), her eighth and final film with Clark Gable. She later starred as a facially disfigured blackmailer in "A Woman's Face" (1941), a remake of the Swedish film "En kvinnas ansikte" which had starred Ingrid Bergman in the lead role three years earlier. While the film was only a moderate box office success, her performance was hailed by many critics.

Crawford adopted her first child, a daughter, in 1940. Because she was single, California law prevented her from adopting within the state so she arranged the adoption through an agency in Las Vegas. The child was temporarily called Joan until Crawford changed her name to Christina. Crawford married actor Phillip Terry on July 21, 1942 after a six-month courtship. Together the couple adopted a son whom they named Christopher, but his birth mother reclaimed the child. The couple adopted another boy, whom they named Phillip Terry, Jr. After the marriage ended in 1946, Crawford changed the child's name to Christopher Crawford.

After eighteen years, Crawford's contract with MGM was terminated by mutual consent on June 29, 1943. In lieu of the last film remaining under her contract, MGM bought her out for $100,000. During World War II she was a member of American Women's Voluntary Services.

For $500,000, Crawford signed with Warner Brothers for a three-movie deal and was placed on the payroll on July 1, 1943. Her first film for the studio was "Hollywood Canteen" (1944), an all-star morale-booster film that teamed her with several other top movie stars at the time. Crawford said one of the main reasons she signed with Warner Brothers was because she wanted to play the character "Mattie" in a proposed 1944 film version of Edith Wharton's novel "Ethan Frome" (1911).

She wanted to play the title role in "Mildred Pierce" (1945), but Bette Davis was the studio's first choice. However, Davis turned the role down. Director Michael Curtiz did not want Crawford to play the part, and he instead lobbied for the casting of Barbara Stanwyck. Warner Bros went against Curtiz and cast Crawford in the film. Throughout the entire production of the movie, Curtiz criticized Crawford. He has been quoted as having told Jack L. Warner, "She comes over here with her high-hat airs and her goddamn shoulder pads... why should I waste my time directing a has-been?" Curtiz demanded Crawford prove her suitability by taking a screen test. She agreed. After the test, Curtiz agreed to Crawford's casting. "Mildred Pierce" was a resounding critical and commercial success. It epitomized the lush visual style and the hard-boiled film noir sensibility that defined Warner Bros. movies of the late forties, earning Crawford the Academy Award for Best Actress in a Leading Role.

The success of "Mildred Pierce" revived Crawford's movie career. For several years, she starred in what were called "a series of first-rate melodramas". Her next film was "Humoresque" (1946), co-starring John Garfield, a romantic drama about a love affair between an older woman and a younger man. She starred alongside Van Heflin in "Possessed" (1947), for which she received a second Academy Award nomination, although she did not win. In "Daisy Kenyon" (1947), she appeared opposite Dana Andrews and Henry Fonda, and in "Flamingo Road" (1949) her character has an ultimately deadly feud with a corrupt southern Sheriff played by Sydney Greenstreet. She made a cameo appearance in "It's a Great Feeling" (1949), poking fun at her own screen image. In 1950, she starred in the film noir, "The Damned Don't Cry!", and starred in "Harriet Craig".

After the completion of "This Woman Is Dangerous" (1952), a film Crawford called her "worst", she asked to be released from her Warner Brothers contract. By this time she felt Warners was losing interest in her and she decided it was time to move on. Later that same year, she received her third and final Academy Award nomination for "Sudden Fear" for RKO Radio Pictures. In 1953, she appeared in her final film for MGM, "Torch Song". The movie received favorable reviews and moderate success at the box office.

Crawford adopted two more children in 1947, two girls she named Cindy and Cathy.

Crawford worked in the radio series "The Screen Guild Theater" on January 8, 1939; "Good News"; "Baby", broadcast March 2, 1940 on Arch Oboler's "Lights Out"; "The Word" on "Everyman's Theater" (1941); "Chained" on the "Lux Radio Theater" and Norman Corwin's "Document A/777" (1948). She appeared in episodes of anthology television series in the 1950s and, in 1959, made a pilot for her series, "The Joan Crawford Show".

Crawford married her fourth and final husband, Alfred Steele, at the Flamingo Hotel in Las Vegas on May 10, 1955. Crawford and Steele met at a party in 1950 when Steele was an executive at PepsiCo. They renewed their acquaintance at a New Year's Eve party in 1954. Steele by that time had become President of Pepsi Cola. Alfred Steele would later be named Chairman of the Board and Chief Executive Officer of Pepsi Cola. She traveled extensively on behalf of Pepsi following the marriage. She estimated that she traveled over 100,000 miles for the company.

Steele died of a heart attack in April 1959. Crawford was initially advised that her services were no longer required. After she told the story to Louella Parsons, Pepsi reversed its position and Crawford was elected to fill the vacant seat on the board of directors.

Crawford received the sixth annual "Pally Award", which was in the shape of a bronze Pepsi bottle. It was awarded to the employee making the most significant contribution to company sales. In 1973, Crawford was forced to retire from the company at the behest of company executive Don Kendall, whom Crawford had referred to for years as "Fang".

After her Academy Award nominated performance in 1952's "Sudden Fear", Crawford continued to work steadily throughout the rest of the decade. After a ten-year absence, she returned to MGM to star in "Torch Song" (1953), a musical drama centering on the life of a demanding stage star who falls in love with a blind pianist, played by Michael Wilding. Although the film was highly publicized as Crawford's major comeback, it was ultimately a critical and financial failure, known today for its camp appeal. In 1954, she starred in the cult camp western film classic "Johnny Guitar", co-starring Sterling Hayden and Mercedes McCambridge. She also starred in "Female on the Beach" (1955) with Jeff Chandler, and in "Queen Bee" (1955) alongside John Ireland.

The following year, she starred opposite a young Cliff Robertson in "Autumn Leaves" (1956) and filmed a leading role in "The Story of Esther Costello" (1957), co-starring Rossano Brazzi. Crawford, who had been left near-penniless following Alfred Steele's death accepted a small role in "The Best of Everything" (1959). Although she was not the star of the film, she received positive reviews. Crawford would later name the role as being one of her personal favorites. However, by the early 1960s, Crawford's status in motion pictures had declined considerably.
Crawford starred as Blanche Hudson, an old, wheelchair-bound former A-list movie star who lives in fear of her psychotic sister Jane, in the highly successful psychological thriller "What Ever Happened to Baby Jane?" (1962). Despite the actresses' earlier tensions, Crawford reportedly suggested Bette Davis for the role of Jane. The two stars maintained publicly that there was no feud between them. The director, Robert Aldrich, explained that Davis and Crawford were each aware of how important the film was to their respective careers and commented, "It's proper to say that they really detested each other, but they behaved absolutely perfectly."

After filming was completed, their public comments against each other propelled their animosity into a lifelong feud. The film was a huge success, recouping its costs within 11 days of its nationwide release, and temporarily revived Crawford's career. Davis was nominated for an Academy Award for her performance as Jane Hudson. Crawford secretly contacted each of the other Oscar nominees in the category (Katharine Hepburn, Lee Remick, Geraldine Page and Anne Bancroft, all East Coast-based actresses), to let them know that if they could not attend the ceremony, she would be happy to accept the Oscar on their behalf; all agreed. Both Davis and Crawford were backstage when the absent Anne Bancroft was announced as the winner, and Crawford accepted the award on her behalf. Davis claimed for the rest of her life that Crawford had campaigned against her, a charge Crawford denied.

That same year, Crawford starred as Lucy Harbin in William Castle's horror mystery "Strait-Jacket" (1964). Robert Aldrich cast Crawford and Davis in "Hush... Hush, Sweet Charlotte" (1964). After a purported campaign of harassment by Davis on location in Louisiana, Crawford returned to Hollywood and entered a hospital. After a prolonged absence, during which Crawford was accused of feigning illness, Aldrich was forced to replace her with Olivia de Havilland. Crawford claimed to be devastated, saying "I heard the news of my replacement over the radio, lying in my hospital bed ... I cried for nine hours." Crawford nursed grudges against Davis and Aldrich for the rest of her life, saying of Aldrich, "He is a man who loves evil, horrendous, vile things", to which Aldrich replied, "If the shoe fits, wear it, and I am very fond of Miss Crawford." Despite being replaced, brief footage of Crawford made it into the film, when she is seen sitting in a taxi in a wide shot.

In 1965 she played Amy Nelson in "I Saw What You Did" (1965), another William Castle vehicle. She starred as Monica Rivers in Herman Cohen's horror thriller film "Berserk!" (1967). After the film's release, Crawford guest-starred as herself on "The Lucy Show". The episode, "Lucy and the Lost Star", first aired on February 26, 1968. Crawford struggled during rehearsals and drank heavily on-set, leading series star Lucille Ball to suggest replacing her with Gloria Swanson. However, Crawford was letter-perfect the day of the show, which included dancing the Charleston, and received two standing ovations from the studio audience.

In October 1968, Crawford's 29-year-old daughter, Christina (who was then acting in New York on the CBS soap opera "The Secret Storm"), needed immediate medical attention for a ruptured ovarian tumor. Despite the fact that Christina's character was a 28-year-old and Crawford was in her sixties, Crawford offered to play her role until Christina was well enough to return, to which producer Gloria Monty readily agreed. Although Crawford did well in rehearsal, she lost her composure while taping and the director and producer were left to struggle to piece together the necessary footage.

Crawford's appearance in the 1969 television film "Night Gallery" (which served as pilot to the series that followed), marked one of Steven Spielberg's earliest directing jobs. She made a cameo appearance as herself in the first episode of the situation comedy "The Tim Conway Show", which aired on January 30, 1970. She starred on the big screen one final time, playing Dr. Brockton in Herman Cohen's science fiction horror film "Trog" (1970), rounding out a career spanning 45 years and more than eighty motion pictures. Crawford made three more television appearances, as Stephanie White in a 1970 episode ("The Nightmare") of "The Virginian" and as Joan Fairchild (her final performance) in a 1972 episode ("Dear Joan: We're Going to Scare You to Death") of "The Sixth Sense".

In 1970, Crawford was presented with the Cecil B. DeMille Award by John Wayne at the Golden Globes, which was telecast from the Coconut Grove at The Ambassador Hotel in Los Angeles. She also spoke at Stephens College, where she had been a student for two months in 1922.

Crawford published her autobiography, "A Portrait of Joan", co-written with Jane Kesner Ardmore, in 1962 through Doubleday. Crawford's next book, "My Way of Life", was published in 1971 by Simon & Schuster. Those expecting a racy tell-all were disappointed, although Crawford's meticulous ways were revealed in her advice on grooming, wardrobe, exercise, and even food storage. Upon her death there were found in her apartment photographs of John F. Kennedy, for whom she had voted for in the 1960 presidential election.

In September 1973, Crawford moved from apartment 22-G to a smaller apartment next door (22-H) at the Imperial House, 150 East 69th Street. Her last public appearance was made on September 23, 1974, at a party honoring her old friend Rosalind Russell at New York's Rainbow Room. Russell was suffering from breast cancer and arthritis at the time. When Crawford saw the unflattering photos that appeared in the papers the next day, she said, "If that's how I look, then they won't see me anymore." Crawford cancelled all public appearances, began declining interviews and left her apartment less and less. Dental-related issues, including surgery which left her needing round-the-clock nursing care, plagued her from 1972 until mid-1975. While on antibiotics for this problem in October 1974, her drinking caused her to pass out, slip and strike her face. The incident scared her enough to give up drinking, although she insisted that it was because of her return to Christian Science. The incident is recorded in a series of letters sent to her insurance company held in the stack files on the 3rd floor of the New York Public Library for the Performing Arts; it is also documented by Carl Johnnes in his biography of the actress, "Joan Crawford: The Last Years".

When it came to personal politics, Crawford aligned herself as a Democrat who greatly supported, and admired, the administrations of John F. Kennedy and Franklin D. Roosevelt. She was once noted as saying: "The Democratic party is one that I've always observed. I have struggled greatly in life from the day I was born and I am honored to be a part of something that focuses on working class citizens and molds them into a proud specimen. Mr. Roosevelt and Mr. Kennedy have done so much in that regard for the two generations they've won over during their career course."

On May 8, 1977, Crawford gave away her beloved Shih Tzu, "Princess Lotus Blossom," being too weak to care for her. Crawford died two days later at her New York apartment of a heart attack. A funeral was held at Campbell Funeral Home, New York, on May 13, 1977. In her will, which was signed on October 28, 1976, Crawford bequeathed to her two youngest children, Cindy and Cathy, $77,500 each from her $2,000,000 estate.

She explicitly disinherited the two eldest, Christina and Christopher: "It is my intention to make no provision herein for my son, Christopher, or my daughter, Christina, for reasons which are well known to them". She also bequeathed nothing to her niece, Joan Lowe (1933–1999; born Joan Crawford LeSueur, the only child of her estranged brother, Hal). Crawford left money to her favorite charities: the U.S.O. of New York, the Motion Picture Home, the American Cancer Society, the Muscular Dystrophy Association, the American Heart Association, and the Wiltwyck School for Boys.

A memorial service was held for Crawford at All Souls' Unitarian Church on Lexington Avenue in New York on May 16, 1977, and was attended by, among others, her old Hollywood friend Myrna Loy. Another memorial service, organized by George Cukor, was held on June 24 in the Samuel Goldwyn Theater at the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences in Beverly Hills. Crawford was cremated and her ashes were placed in a crypt with her fourth and final husband, Alfred Steele, in Ferncliff Cemetery, Hartsdale, New York.
Joan Crawford's handprints and footprints are immortalized in the forecourt of Grauman's Chinese Theater on Hollywood Boulevard in Hollywood. She has a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame at 1752 Vine Street for her contributions to the motion picture industry. "Playboy" listed Crawford as #84 of the "100 Sexiest Women of the 20th century". Crawford was also voted the tenth greatest female star of the classic American cinema by the American Film Institute.

In November 1978, Christina Crawford published "Mommie Dearest", which contained allegations that her late adoptive mother was emotionally and physically abusive to Christina and her brother Christopher because she was more interested in her career than in being a mother. Many of Crawford's friends and co-workers, including Van Johnson, Ann Blyth, Myrna Loy, Katharine Hepburn, Cesar Romero, Gary Gray, Douglas Fairbanks Jr. (Crawford's first husband), and Crawford's two other younger daughters—Cathy and Cindy—denounced the book, categorically denying any abuse. But others, including Betty Hutton, Helen Hayes, James MacArthur (Hayes' son), June Allyson, Liz Smith, Rex Reed, and Vincent Sherman stated they had witnessed some form of abusive behavior. Crawford's secretary, Jeri Binder Smith, confirmed Christina's account. "Mommie Dearest" became a bestseller and was made into the 1981 biographical film "Mommie Dearest", starring Faye Dunaway as Crawford.

The feud between Crawford and Bette Davis is depicted in Shaun Considine's 1989 book "". It was fueled by competition over film roles, Academy Awards, and Franchot Tone, Davis’ co-star in 1935's "Dangerous".

The Crawford–Davis rivalry is the subject of the 2017 first season of the FX anthology television series "Feud", subtitled "Bette and Joan". Crawford is played by Jessica Lange; Davis by Susan Sarandon.





</doc>
<doc id="63517" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63517" title="Bette Davis">
Bette Davis

Ruth Elizabeth "Bette" Davis (; April 5, 1908 – October 6, 1989) was an American actress of film, television, and theater. Regarded as one of the greatest actresses in Hollywood history, she was noted for her willingness to play unsympathetic, sardonic characters and was famous for her performances in a range of film genres, from contemporary crime melodramas to historical and period films, suspense horror and occasional comedies, although her greatest successes were her roles in romantic dramas.

After appearing in Broadway plays, Davis moved to Hollywood in 1930. However, her early films for Universal Studios (and as a loanout to other studios) were unsuccessful. She joined Warner Bros. in 1932 and established her career with several critically acclaimed performances. In 1937, she attempted to free herself from her contract. Although she lost the well-publicized legal case against the studio, it marked the beginning of the most successful period of her career. Until the late 1940s, she was one of American cinema's most celebrated leading ladies, known for her forceful and intense style. Davis gained a reputation as a perfectionist who could be highly combative and confrontational. She clashed with studio executives and film directors as well as many of her co-stars. Her forthright manner, idiosyncratic speech and ubiquitous cigarette contributed to a public persona, which has often been imitated.

Davis was the co-founder of the Hollywood Canteen, and was the first female president of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences. She won the Academy Award for Best Actress twice, was the first person to accrue ten Academy Award nominations for acting, and was the first woman to receive a Lifetime Achievement Award from the American Film Institute. Her career went through several periods of eclipse, and she admitted that her success had often been at the expense of her personal relationships. Married four times, she was once widowed and three times divorced, and raised her children as a single parent. Her final years were marred by a long period of ill health, but she continued acting until shortly before her death from breast cancer, with more than 100 film, television and theater roles to her credit. In 1999, Davis was placed second behind Katharine Hepburn on the American Film Institute's list of the greatest female stars of classic Hollywood cinema.

Ruth Elizabeth Davis, known from early childhood as "Betty", was born on April 5, 1908, in Lowell, Massachusetts, the daughter of Harlow Morrell Davis (1885–1938), a law student from Augusta, Maine, and subsequently a patent attorney, and Ruth Augusta (née Favór; 1885–1961), from Tyngsboro, Massachusetts. Her ancestry was primarily English. Betty's younger sister was Barbara Harriet.

In 1915, Davis' parents separated, and Betty attended a Spartan boarding school called Crestalban in Lanesborough in the Berkshires. In 1921, Ruth Davis moved to New York City with her daughters, where she worked as a portrait photographer. Betty changed the spelling of her name to "Bette" after Honoré de Balzac's "La Cousine Bette".

Davis attended Cushing Academy, a boarding school in Ashburnham, Massachusetts, where she met her future husband, Harmon O. Nelson, known as "Ham". In 1926, she saw a production of Henrik Ibsen's "The Wild Duck" with Blanche Yurka and Peg Entwistle. Davis later recalled for Al Cohn of "Newsday", "The reason I wanted to go into theater was because of an actress named Peg Entwistle." She auditioned for admission to Eva Le Gallienne's Manhattan Civic Repertory, but was rejected by LeGallienne, who described her attitude as "insincere" and "frivolous".

Davis auditioned for George Cukor's stock theater company in Rochester, New York; although he was not very impressed, he gave Davis her first paid acting assignment—a one-week stint playing the part of a chorus girl in the play "Broadway". In 1929, Davis was chosen by Blanche Yurka to play Hedwig, the character she had seen Entwistle play in "The Wild Duck." After performing in Philadelphia, Washington, and Boston, she made her Broadway debut in 1929 in "Broken Dishes", and followed it with "Solid South."

In 1930, Davis moved to Hollywood to screen test for Universal Studios. Davis and her mother traveled by train to Hollywood. She later recounted her surprise that nobody from the studio was there to meet her. In fact, a studio employee had waited for her but left because he saw nobody who "looked like an actress". She failed her first screen test, but was used in several screen tests for other actors. In a 1971 interview with Dick Cavett, she related the experience with the observation, "I was the most Yankee-est, most modest virgin who ever walked the earth. They laid me on a couch, and I tested fifteen men ... They all had to lie on top of me and give me a passionate kiss. Oh, I thought I would die. Just thought I would die." A second test was arranged for Davis, for the 1931 film "A House Divided". Hastily dressed in an ill-fitting costume with a low neckline, she was rebuffed by the director William Wyler, who loudly commented to the assembled crew, "What do you think of these dames who show their chests and think they can get jobs?"

Carl Laemmle, the head of Universal Studios, considered terminating Davis' employment, but cinematographer Karl Freund told him she had "lovely eyes" and would be suitable for "Bad Sister" (1931), in which she subsequently made her film debut. Her nervousness was compounded when she overheard the chief of production, Carl Laemmle, Jr., comment to another executive that she had "about as much sex appeal as Slim Summerville", one of the film's co-stars. The film was not a success, and her next role in "Seed" (1931) was too brief to attract attention.

Universal Studios renewed her contract for three months, and she appeared in a small role in "Waterloo Bridge" (1931) before being lent to Columbia Pictures for "The Menace" and to Capital Films for "Hell's House" (all 1932). After one year, and six unsuccessful films, Laemmle elected not to renew her contract.

Davis was preparing to return to New York when actor George Arliss chose Davis for the lead female role in the Warner Bros. picture "The Man Who Played God" (1932), and for the rest of her life, Davis credited him with helping her achieve her "break" in Hollywood. "The Saturday Evening Post" wrote, "she is not only beautiful, but she bubbles with charm" and compared her to Constance Bennett and Olive Borden. Warner Bros. signed her to a five-year contract, and she remained with the studio for the next 18 years.

Davis married Harmon Oscar Nelson on August 18, 1932, in Yuma, Arizona. Their marriage was scrutinized by the press; his $100 a week earnings compared unfavorably with Davis' reported $1,000 a week income. Davis addressed the issue in an interview, pointing out that many Hollywood wives earned more than their husbands, but the situation proved difficult for Nelson, who refused to allow Davis to purchase a house until he could afford to pay for it himself. Davis had several abortions during the marriage.
After more than 20 film roles, the role of the vicious and slatternly Mildred Rogers in the RKO Radio production of "Of Human Bondage" (1934), a film adaptation of W. Somerset Maugham's novel, earned Davis her first major critical acclaim. Many actresses feared playing unsympathetic characters and several had refused the role, but Davis viewed it as an opportunity to show the range of her acting skills. Her co-star, Leslie Howard, was initially dismissive of her, but as filming progressed, his attitude changed and he subsequently spoke highly of her abilities. The director, John Cromwell, allowed her relative freedom: "I let Bette have her head. I trusted her instincts." She insisted that she be portrayed realistically in her death scene, and said, "the last stages of consumption, poverty, and neglect are not pretty and I intended to be convincing-looking."

The film was a success, and Davis' characterization won praise from critics, with "Life" writing that she gave "probably the best performance ever recorded on the screen by a U.S. actress". Davis anticipated that her reception would encourage Warner Bros. to cast her in more important roles and was disappointed when Jack L. Warner refused to lend her to Columbia Studios to appear in "It Happened One Night" and instead cast her in the melodrama "Housewife". When Davis was not nominated for an Academy Award for "Of Human Bondage", "The Hollywood Citizen News" questioned the omission and Norma Shearer, herself a nominee, joined a campaign to have Davis nominated. This prompted an announcement from the Academy president, Howard Estabrook, who said that under the circumstances "any voter ... may write on the ballot his or her personal choice for the winners", thus allowing, for the only time in the Academy's history, the consideration of a candidate not officially nominated for an award. The uproar led, however, to a change in academy voting procedures the following year, wherein nominations were determined by votes from all eligible members of a particular branch, rather than by a smaller committee, with results independently tabulated by the accounting firm Price Waterhouse.

Davis appeared in "Dangerous" (1935) as a troubled actress and received very good reviews. E. Arnot Robertson wrote in "Picture Post": I think Bette Davis would probably have been burned as a witch if she had lived two or three hundred years ago. She gives the curious feeling of being charged with power which can find no ordinary outlet. "The New York Times" hailed her as "becoming one of the most interesting of our screen actresses." She won the Academy Award for Best Actress for the role but commented that it was belated recognition for "Of Human Bondage", calling the award a "consolation prize". For the rest of her life, Davis maintained that she gave the statue its familiar name of "Oscar" because its posterior resembled that of her husband, whose middle name was Oscar, although, the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences officially makes reference to another story.

In her next film, "The Petrified Forest" (1936), Davis co-starred with Leslie Howard and Humphrey Bogart.

Convinced that her career was being damaged by a succession of mediocre films, Davis accepted an offer in 1936 to appear in two films in Britain. Knowing that she was breaching her contract with Warner Bros., she fled to Canada to avoid legal papers being served on her. Eventually, Davis brought her case to court in Britain, hoping to get out of her contract. She later recalled the opening statement of the barrister, Patrick Hastings, who represented Warner Bros. Hastings urged the court to "come to the conclusion that this is rather a naughty young lady and that what she wants is more money." He mocked Davis' description of her contract as "slavery" by stating, incorrectly, that she was being paid $1,350 per week. He remarked, "if anybody wants to put me into perpetual servitude on the basis of that remuneration, I shall prepare to consider it." The British press offered little support to Davis and portrayed her as overpaid and ungrateful.

Davis explained her viewpoint to a journalist: "I knew that, if I continued to appear in any more mediocre pictures, I would have no career left worth fighting for." Davis' counsel presented her complaints—that she could be suspended without pay for refusing a part, with the period of suspension added to her contract, that she could be called upon to play any part within her abilities regardless of her personal beliefs, that she could be required to support a political party against her beliefs, and that her image and likeness could be displayed in any manner deemed applicable by the studio. Jack Warner testified and was asked, "Whatever part you choose to call upon her to play, if she thinks she can play it, whether it is distasteful and cheap, she has to play it?" Warner replied, "Yes, she must play it." Davis lost the case and returned to Hollywood, in debt and without income, to resume her career. Olivia de Havilland mounted a similar case in 1943 and won.

Davis began work on "Marked Woman" (1937), portraying a prostitute in a contemporary gangster drama inspired by the case of Lucky Luciano. For her performance in the film, she was awarded the Volpi Cup at the 1937 Venice Film Festival. Her next picture was "Jezebel" (1938), and during production, Davis entered a relationship with director William Wyler. She later described him as the "love of my life" and said that making the film with him was "the time in my life of my most perfect happiness". The film was a success, and Davis' performance as a spoiled Southern belle earned her a second Academy Award.

This led to speculation in the press that she would be chosen to play a similar character, Scarlett O'Hara, in "Gone with the Wind". Davis expressed her desire to play Scarlett, and while David O. Selznick was conducting a search for the actress to play the role, a radio poll named her as the audience favorite. Warner offered her services to Selznick as part of a deal that also included Errol Flynn and Olivia de Havilland, but Selznick did not consider Davis as suitable, and rejected the offer, while Davis did not want Flynn cast as Rhett Butler. Newcomer Vivien Leigh was eventually cast as Scarlett O'Hara, while de Havilland landed a role as Melanie, and both of them were nominated for the Oscars, with Leigh winning.

"Jezebel" marked the beginning of the most successful phase of Davis' career, and over the next few years, she was listed in the annual Quigley Poll of the Top Ten Money Making Stars, which was compiled from the votes of movie exhibitors throughout the U.S. for the stars who had generated the most revenue in their theaters over the previous year.

In contrast to Davis' success, her husband, Ham Nelson, had failed to establish a career for himself, and their relationship faltered. In 1938, Nelson obtained evidence that Davis was engaged in a sexual relationship with Howard Hughes and subsequently filed for divorce, citing Davis' "cruel and inhuman manner."
Davis was emotional during the making of her next film, "Dark Victory" (1939), and considered abandoning it until the producer Hal B. Wallis convinced her to channel her despair into her acting. The film became one of the highest-grossing films of the year, and the role of Judith Traherne brought her an Academy Award nomination. In later years, Davis cited this performance as her personal favorite.

She appeared in three other box-office hits in 1939: "The Old Maid" with Miriam Hopkins, "Juarez" with Paul Muni, and "The Private Lives of Elizabeth and Essex" with Errol Flynn. The last was her first color film and her only color film made during the height of her career. To play the elderly Elizabeth I of England, Davis shaved her hairline and eyebrows.

During filming, she was visited on the set by the actor Charles Laughton. She commented that she had a "nerve" playing a woman in her sixties, to which Laughton replied, "Never not dare to hang yourself. That's the only way you grow in your profession. You must continually attempt things that you think are beyond you, or you get into a complete rut." Recalling the episode many years later, Davis remarked that Laughton's advice had influenced her throughout her career.

By this time, Davis was Warner Bros.' most profitable star and she was given the most important of their female leading roles. Her image was considered with more care; although she continued to play character roles, she was often filmed in close-ups that emphasized her distinctive eyes. "All This and Heaven Too" (1940) was the most financially successful film of Davis' career to that point.

"The Letter" (1940) was considered "one of the best pictures of the year" by "The Hollywood Reporter," and Davis won admiration for her portrayal of an adulterous killer, a role originated by Katharine Cornell. During this time, she was in a relationship with her former costar George Brent, who proposed marriage. Davis refused, as she had met Arthur Farnsworth, a New England innkeeper. Davis and Farnsworth were married at Home Ranch, in Rimrock, Arizona, in December 1940.
In January 1941, Davis became the first female president of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences but antagonized the committee members with her brash manner and radical proposals. Davis rejected the idea of her being just "a figurehead only". Faced with the disapproval and resistance of the committee, Davis resigned, and was succeeded by her predecessor Walter Wanger.

Davis starred in three movies in 1941, the first being "The Great Lie", opposite George Brent. It was a refreshingly different role for Davis, as she played a kind, sympathetic character.

William Wyler directed Davis for the third time in Lillian Hellman's "The Little Foxes" (1941), but they clashed over the character of Regina Giddens, a role originally played on Broadway by Tallulah Bankhead (Davis had portrayed in film roles initiated by Bankhead on the stage twice before, in "Dark Victory" and "Jezebel"). Wyler encouraged Davis to emulate Bankhead's interpretation of the role but Davis wanted to make the role her own. She received another Academy Award nomination for her performance and never worked with Wyler again.

Following the attack on Pearl Harbor, Davis spent the early months of 1942 selling war bonds. After Jack Warner criticized her tendency to cajole crowds into buying, she reminded him that her audiences responded most strongly to her "bitch" performances. She sold $2 million worth of bonds in two days, as well as a picture of herself in "Jezebel" for $250,000. She also performed for black regiments as the only white member of an acting troupe formed by Hattie McDaniel, which included Lena Horne and Ethel Waters.

At John Garfield's suggestion of opening a servicemen's club in Hollywood, Davis—with the aid of Warner, Cary Grant, and Jule Styne—transformed an old nightclub into the Hollywood Canteen, which opened on October 3, 1942. Hollywood's most important stars volunteered to entertain servicemen. Davis ensured that every night, a few important "names" would be there for the visiting soldiers to meet.

She appeared as herself in the film "Hollywood Canteen" (1944), which used the canteen as the setting for a fictional story. Davis later commented, "There are few accomplishments in my life that I am sincerely proud of. The Hollywood Canteen is one of them." In 1980, she was awarded the Distinguished Civilian Service Medal, the United States Department of Defense's highest civilian award, for her work with the Hollywood Canteen.
Davis showed little interest in the film "Now, Voyager" (1942) until Hal Wallis advised her that female audiences needed romantic dramas to distract them from the reality of their lives. It became one of the best known of her "women's pictures". In one of the film's most imitated scenes, Paul Henreid lights two cigarettes as he stares into Davis' eyes and passes one to her. Film reviewers complimented Davis on her performance, the "National Board of Review" commenting that she gave the film "a dignity not fully warranted by the script."

During the early 1940s, several of Davis' film choices were influenced by the war, such as "Watch on the Rhine" (1943), by Lillian Hellman, and "Thank Your Lucky Stars" (1943), a lighthearted all-star musical cavalcade, with each of the featured stars donating their fees to the Hollywood Canteen. Davis performed a novelty song, "They're Either Too Young or Too Old", which became a hit record after the film's release.

"Old Acquaintance" (1943) reunited her with Miriam Hopkins in a story of two old friends who deal with the tensions created when one of them becomes a successful novelist. Davis felt that Hopkins tried to upstage her throughout the film. Director Vincent Sherman recalled the intense competitiveness and animosity between the two actresses, and Davis often joked that she held back nothing in a scene in which she was required to shake Hopkins in a fit of anger.

In August 1943, Davis' husband, Arthur Farnsworth, collapsed while walking along a Hollywood street and died two days later. An autopsy revealed that his fall had been caused by a skull fracture he had suffered two weeks earlier. Davis testified before an inquest that she knew of no event that might have caused the injury. A finding of accidental death was reached. Highly distraught, Davis attempted to withdraw from her next film "Mr. Skeffington" (1944), but Jack Warner, who had halted production following Farnsworth's death, convinced her to continue.

Although she had gained a reputation for being forthright and demanding, her behavior during filming of "Mr. Skeffington" was erratic and out of character. She alienated Vincent Sherman by refusing to film certain scenes and insisting that some sets be rebuilt. She improvised dialogue, causing confusion among other actors, and infuriated the writer, Julius Epstein, who was called upon to rewrite scenes at her whim. Davis later explained her actions with the observation, "when I was most unhappy I lashed out rather than whined." Some reviewers criticized Davis for the excess of her performance; James Agee wrote that she "demonstrates the horrors of egocentricity on a marathonic scale;" but despite the mixed reviews, she received another Academy Award nomination.

In 1945, Davis married artist William Grant Sherry, who also worked as a masseur. She had been drawn to him because he claimed he had never heard of her and was, therefore, not intimidated by her. The same year, Davis refused the title role in "Mildred Pierce" (1945), a role for which Joan Crawford won an Academy Award, and instead made "The Corn Is Green" (1945) based on a play by Emlyn Williams.

Davis played Miss Moffat, an English teacher who saves a young Welsh miner (John Dall) from a life in the coal pits, by offering him education. The part had been played in the theatre by Ethel Barrymore but Warner Bros. felt that the film version should depict the character as a younger woman. Davis disagreed, and insisted on playing the part as written and wore a gray wig and padding under her clothes, to create a dowdy appearance.

The film was well received by critics and made a profit of $2.2 million. The critic E. Arnot Robertson observed: Only Bette Davis...could have combated so successfully the obvious intention of the adaptors of the play to make frustrated sex the mainspring of the chief character's interest in the young miner. She concluded that "the subtle interpretation she insisted on giving" kept the focus on the teacher's "sheer joy in imparting knowledge".

Her next film, "A Stolen Life" (1946), was the only film that Davis made with her own production company, BD Productions. Davis played dual roles, as twins. The film received poor reviews and was described by Bosley Crowther as "a distressingly empty piece;" but, with a profit of $2.5 million, it was one of her biggest box office successes. In 1947, the U.S. Treasury named Davis as the highest-paid woman in the country, with her share of the film's profit accounting for most of her earnings. Her next film was "Deception" (1946), the first of her films to lose money.

"Possessed" (1947) had been tailor-made for Davis and was to have been her next project after "Deception." However, she was pregnant and went on maternity leave. Joan Crawford played her role in "Possessed" and was nominated for an Academy Award as Best Actress. In 1947, at the age of 39, Davis gave birth to a daughter, Barbara Davis Sherry (known as B.D.) and later wrote in her memoir that she became absorbed in motherhood and considered ending her career. As she continued making films, however, her relationship with her daughter B.D. began to deteriorate and her popularity with audiences was steadily declining.

Among the film roles offered to Davis following her return to film-making was Rose Sayer in "The African Queen" (1951). When informed that the film was to be shot in Africa, Davis refused the part, telling Jack Warner, "If you can't shoot the picture in a boat on the back lot, then I'm not interested." Katharine Hepburn played the role and was nominated for an Academy Award as Best Actress.

Davis was also offered a role in a film version of the Virginia Kellogg prison drama "Women Without Men". Originally intended to pair Davis with Joan Crawford, Davis made it clear that she would not appear in any "dyke movie". It was filmed as "Caged" (1950), and the lead roles were played by Eleanor Parker (who was nominated for an Academy Award as Best Actress) and Agnes Moorehead. She lobbied Jack Warner to make two films, "Ethan Frome" and a biography of Mary Todd Lincoln; however, Warner vetoed each proposal.
In 1948, Davis was cast in the melodrama "Winter Meeting". Although she was initially enthusiastic, she soon learned that Warner had arranged for "softer" lighting to be used to disguise her age. She recalled that she had seen the same lighting technique "on the sets of Ruth Chatterton and Kay Francis, and I knew what they meant". To add to her disappointment, she was not confident in the abilities of her leading man, James Davis in his first major screen role. She disagreed with changes made to the script because of censorship restrictions and found that many of the aspects of the role that had initially appealed to her had been cut. The film was later described by Bosley Crowther as "interminable", and he noted that "of all the miserable dilemmas in which Miss Davis has been involved ... this one is probably the worst". It failed at the box office and the studio lost nearly $1 million.

While making "June Bride" (1948), Davis clashed with co-star Robert Montgomery, later describing him as "a male Miriam Hopkins... an excellent actor, but addicted to scene-stealing." The film marked her first comedy in several years and earned her some positive reviews, but it was not particularly popular with audiences and returned only a small profit.

Despite the lackluster box office receipts from her more recent films, in 1949 she negotiated a four-film contract with Warner Bros. that paid $10,285 per week and made her the highest-paid woman in the United States. However, Jack Warner had refused to allow her script approval and cast her in "Beyond the Forest" (1949). Davis reportedly loathed the script and begged Warner to recast the role but he refused. After the film was completed, her request to be released from her contract was honored.

The reviews of the film were scathing. Dorothy Manners, writing for the "Los Angeles Examiner", described the film as "an unfortunate finale to her brilliant career." Hedda Hopper wrote, "If Bette had deliberately set out to wreck her career, she could not have picked a more appropriate vehicle." The film contained the line, "What a dump!," which became closely associated with Davis after it was referenced in Edward Albee's "Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf?," and impersonators began to use it in their acts.

Davis filmed "The Story of a Divorce" (released by RKO Radio Pictures in 1951 as "Payment on Demand"). Shortly before filming was completed, producer Darryl F. Zanuck offered her the role of the aging theatrical actress Margo Channing in "All About Eve" (1950). Davis read the script, described it as the best she had ever read, and accepted the role. Within days, she joined the cast in San Francisco to begin filming. During production, she established what would become a lifelong friendship with her co-star, Anne Baxter, and a romantic relationship with her leading man, Gary Merrill, which led to marriage. The film's director, Joseph L. Mankiewicz, later remarked, "Bette was letter perfect. She was syllable-perfect. The director's dream: the prepared actress."

Critics responded positively to Davis' performance, and several of her lines became well-known, particularly "Fasten your seatbelts, it's going to be a bumpy night." She was again nominated for an Academy Award and critics such as Gene Ringgold described her Margo as her "all-time best performance." Pauline Kael wrote that much of Mankiewicz' vision of "the theater" was "nonsense" but commended Davis, writing "[the film is] saved by one performance that is the real thing: Bette Davis is at her most instinctive and assured. Her actress—vain, scared, a woman who goes too far in her reactions and emotions—makes the whole thing come alive."

Davis won a Best Actress award from the Cannes Film Festival, and the New York Film Critics Circle Award. She also received the San Francisco Film Critics Circle Award as "Best Actress", having been named by them as the "Worst Actress" of 1949 for "Beyond the Forest". During this time, she was invited to leave her handprints in the forecourt of Grauman's Chinese Theatre.

On July 3, 1950, Davis' divorce from William Sherry was finalized, and on July 28, she married Gary Merrill. With Sherry's consent, Merrill adopted B. D., Davis' daughter with Sherry. In January 1951, Davis and Merrill adopted a 5-day-old baby girl they named Margot Mosher Merrill (born January 6, 1951), after the character Margo Channing. Davis and Merrill lived with their three children on an estate on the coast of Cape Elizabeth, Maine. Davis, after semi-retirement in the mid-1950s, again starred in several movies during her time in Maine, including 1955's "The Virgin Queen", in which she played Queen Elizabeth I.

The family traveled to England, where Davis and Merrill starred in a murder-mystery film, "Another Man's Poison" (1951). When it received lukewarm reviews and failed at the box office, Hollywood columnists wrote that Davis' comeback had petered out, and an Academy Award nomination for "The Star" (1952) did not halt her decline.

Davis and Merrill adopted a baby boy, Michael (born January 5, 1952), in 1952, and Davis appeared in a Broadway revue, "Two's Company" directed by Jules Dassin. She was uncomfortable working outside of her area of expertise; she had never been a musical performer and her limited theater experience had been more than 20 years earlier. She was also severely ill and was operated on for osteomyelitis of the jaw. Margot was diagnosed as severely brain-damaged due to an injury sustained during or shortly after her birth, and was placed in an institution around the age of 3. Davis and Merrill began arguing frequently, with B.D. later recalling episodes of alcohol abuse and domestic violence.

Few of Davis' films of the 1950s were successful, and many of her performances were condemned by critics. "The Hollywood Reporter" wrote of mannerisms "that you'd expect to find in a nightclub impersonation of [Davis]," while the London critic, Richard Winninger, wrote,
Miss Davis, with more say than most stars as to what films she makes, seems to have lapsed into egoism. The criterion for her choice of film would appear to be that nothing must compete with the full display of each facet of the Davis art. Only bad films are good enough for her.

Her films of this period included "The Virgin Queen" (1955), "Storm Center" (1956), and "The Catered Affair" (1956). As her career declined, her marriage continued to deteriorate until she filed for divorce in 1960. The following year, her mother died. During the same time, she tried television, appearing in three episodes of the popular NBC Western "Wagon Train" as three different characters in 1959 and 1961; her first appearance on TV had been February 25, 1956, on "General Electric Theatre".

In 1960 Davis, a registered Democrat, appeared at the 1960 Democratic National Convention in Los Angeles, where she met future President John F. Kennedy, whom she greatly admired. Outside of acting and politics, Davis was an active and practicing Episcopalian.

In 1961, Davis opened in the Broadway production "The Night of the Iguana" to mostly mediocre reviews, and left the production after four months due to "chronic illness". She then joined Glenn Ford and Ann-Margret for the Frank Capra film "A Pocketful of Miracles" (1961) (a remake of Capra's 1933 film, "Lady for a Day"), based on a story by Damon Runyon.

She accepted her next role, in the Grand Guignol horror film "What Ever Happened to Baby Jane?" (1962) after reading the script and believing it could appeal to the same audience that had recently made Alfred Hitchcock's "Psycho" (1960) a success. She negotiated a deal that would pay her 10% of the worldwide gross profits, in addition to her salary. The film became one of the year's biggest successes.

Davis and Joan Crawford played two aging sisters, former actresses forced by circumstance to share a decaying Hollywood mansion. The director, Robert Aldrich, explained that Davis and Crawford were each aware of how important the film was to their respective careers and commented, "It's proper to say that they really detested each other, but they behaved absolutely perfectly."

After filming was completed, their public comments against each other allowed the tension to develop into a lifelong feud. When Davis was nominated for an Academy Award, Crawford contacted the other Best Actress nominees (who were unable to attend the ceremonies) and offered to accept the award on their behalf should they win, which was exactly what happened when Anne Bancroft was announced as winner. Crawford accepted the award on Bancroft's behalf.

Davis also received her only BAFTA Award nomination for this performance. Daughter Barbara (credited as B. D. Merrill) played a small role in the film and when Davis and she visited the Cannes Film Festival to promote it, she met Jeremy Hyman, an executive for Seven Arts Productions. After a short courtship, she married Hyman at the age of 16, with Davis' permission.
In October 1962, it was announced that four episodes of the CBS-TV series "Perry Mason" would feature special guest stars who would cover for Raymond Burr during his convalescence from surgery. A "Perry Mason" fan, Davis was the first of the guest stars. "The Case of Constant Doyle" began filming on December 12, 1962, and aired January 31, 1963.

In September 1962, Davis placed an advertisement in "Variety" under the heading of "Situations wanted—women artists", which read: "Mother of three—10, 11 & 15—divorcee. American. Thirty years experience as an actress in Motion Pictures. Mobile still and more affable than rumor would have it. Wants steady employment in Hollywood. (Has had Broadway.)" Davis said that she intended it as a joke, and she sustained her comeback over the course of several years.

"Dead Ringer" (1964) was a crime drama in which she played twin sisters. The film was based in a plot previously filmed in Mexico by Dolores del Rio. "Where Love Has Gone" (1964) was a romantic drama based on a Harold Robbins novel. Davis played the mother of Susan Hayward, but filming was hampered by heated arguments between Davis and Hayward.

"Hush… Hush, Sweet Charlotte" (1964) was Robert Aldrich's follow-up to "What Ever Happened to Baby Jane?," in which he planned to reunite Davis and Crawford, but when Crawford withdrew, allegedly due to illness, soon after filming began, she was replaced by Olivia de Havilland. The film was a considerable success and brought renewed attention to its veteran cast, which also included Joseph Cotten, Mary Astor, and Agnes Moorehead.

The following year, Davis was cast as the lead in an Aaron Spelling sitcom, "The Decorator". A pilot episode was filmed, but was not shown, and the project was terminated. By the end of the decade, Davis had appeared in the British films "The Nanny" (1965), "The Anniversary" (1968), and "Connecting Rooms" (1970), but her career again stalled.

In the early 1970s, Davis was invited to appear in New York City, in a stage presentation, "Great Ladies of the American Cinema". Over five successive nights, a different female star discussed her career and answered questions from the audience; Myrna Loy, Rosalind Russell, Lana Turner, Sylvia Sidney, and Joan Crawford were the other participants. Davis was well received and was invited to tour Australia with the similarly themed, "Bette Davis in Person and on Film," and its success allowed her to take the production to the United Kingdom.

In 1972, Davis played the lead role in two television films that were each intended as pilots for upcoming series for ABC and NBC, "Madame Sin" with Robert Wagner, and "The Judge and Jake Wyler," with Joan Van Ark, but in each case, the network decided against producing a series.

She appeared in the stage production, "Miss Moffat," a musical adaptation of her film "The Corn is Green," but after the show was panned by the Philadelphia critics during its pre-Broadway run, she cited a back injury and abandoned the show, which closed immediately.

She played supporting roles in Comencini's "Lo Scopone scientifico" (1972) with the great Italian actor Alberto Sordi and Joseph Cotten, "Burnt Offerings" (1976), and "The Disappearance of Aimee" (1976), but clashed with Karen Black and Faye Dunaway, the stars of the two latter respective productions, because she felt that neither extended her an appropriate degree of respect, and that their behavior on the film sets was unprofessional.

In 1977, Davis became the first woman to receive the American Film Institute's Lifetime Achievement Award. The televised event included comments from several of Davis' colleagues, including William Wyler, who joked that given the chance, Davis would still like to refilm a scene from "The Letter" to which Davis nodded. Jane Fonda, Henry Fonda, Natalie Wood, and Olivia de Havilland were among the performers who paid tribute, with de Havilland commenting that Davis "got the roles I always wanted".

Following the telecast, she found herself in demand again, often having to choose between several offers. She accepted roles in the television miniseries "The Dark Secret of Harvest Home" (1978) and the theatrical film "Death on the Nile" (1978), an Agatha Christie murder mystery. The bulk of her remaining work was for television. She won an Emmy Award for "" (1979) with Gena Rowlands, and was nominated for her performances in "White Mama" (1980) and "Little Gloria... Happy at Last" (1982). She also played supporting roles in two Disney films, "Return from Witch Mountain" (1978) and "The Watcher in the Woods" (1980).

Davis' name became well-known to a younger audience when Kim Carnes' song "Bette Davis Eyes" (written by Jackie DeShannon) became a worldwide hit and the best-selling record of 1981 in the U.S., where it stayed at number one on the music charts for more than two months. Davis' grandson was impressed that she was the subject of a hit song and Davis considered it a compliment, writing to both Carnes and the songwriters, and accepting the gift of gold and platinum records from Carnes, and hanging them on her wall.

She continued acting for television, appearing in "Family Reunion" (1981) opposite her grandson J. Ashley Hyman, "A Piano for Mrs. Cimino" (1982) and "Right of Way" (1983) with James Stewart. In 1983, she was awarded the Women in Film Crystal Award.

In 1983, after filming the pilot episode for the television series "Hotel," Davis was diagnosed with breast cancer and underwent a mastectomy. Within two weeks of her surgery, she suffered four strokes which caused paralysis in the left side of her face and in her left arm, and left her with slurred speech. She commenced a lengthy period of physical therapy, and aided by her personal assistant, Kathryn Sermak, gained partial recovery from the paralysis. Even late in life, Davis smoked 100 cigarettes a day.

During this time, her relationship with her daughter, B. D. Hyman, deteriorated when Hyman became a born-again Christian and attempted to persuade Davis to follow suit. With her health stable, she traveled to England to film the Agatha Christie mystery "Murder with Mirrors" (1985). Upon her return, she learned that Hyman had published a memoir, "My Mother's Keeper," in which she chronicled a difficult mother-daughter relationship and depicted scenes of Davis' overbearing and drunken behavior.

Several of Davis' friends commented that Hyman's depiction of events was not accurate; one said, "so much of the book is out of context." Mike Wallace rebroadcast a "60 Minutes" interview he had filmed with Hyman a few years earlier in which she commended Davis on her skills as a mother, and said that she had adopted many of Davis' principles in raising her own children.

Critics of Hyman noted that Davis had financially supported the Hyman family for several years and had recently saved them from losing their house. Despite the acrimony of their divorce years earlier, Gary Merrill also defended Davis. Interviewed by CNN, Merrill said that Hyman was motivated by "cruelty and greed." Davis' adopted son, Michael Merrill, ended contact with Hyman and refused to speak to her again, as did Davis, who also disinherited her.
In her second memoir, "This 'N That" (1987), Davis wrote, "I am still recovering from the fact that a child of mine would write about me behind my back, to say nothing about the kind of book it is. I will never recover as completely from B.D.'s book as I have from the stroke. Both were shattering experiences." Her memoir concluded with a letter to her daughter, in which she addressed her several times as "Hyman", and described her actions as "a glaring lack of loyalty and thanks for the very privileged life I feel you have been given". She concluded with a reference to the title of Hyman's book, "If it refers to money, if my memory serves me right, I've been your keeper all these many years. I am continuing to do so, as my name has made your book about me a success."

Davis appeared in the television film "As Summers Die" (1986) and Lindsay Anderson's film "The Whales of August" (1987), in which she played the blind sister of Lillian Gish. Though in poor health at the time, Davis memorized her own and everyone else's lines as she always had. The film earned good reviews, with one critic writing, "Bette crawls across the screen like a testy old hornet on a windowpane, snarling, staggering, twitching—a symphony of misfired synapses." Davis became an honouree of the Kennedy Center Honors for her contribution to films in 1987.

Her last performance was the title role in Larry Cohen's "Wicked Stepmother" (1989). By this time, her health was failing, and after disagreements with Cohen, she walked off the set. The script was rewritten to place more emphasis on Barbara Carrera's character, and the reworked version was released after Davis' death.
After abandoning "Wicked Stepmother" and with no further film offers (though she was keen to play the centenarian in Craig Calman's "The Turn Of The Century" and worked with him on adapting the stage play to a feature-length screenplay), Davis appeared on several talk shows and was interviewed by Johnny Carson, Joan Rivers, Larry King, and David Letterman, discussing her career, but refusing to discuss her daughter. Her appearances were popular; Lindsay Anderson observed that the public enjoyed seeing her behaving "so bitchy": "I always disliked that because she was encouraged to behave badly. And I'd always hear her described by that awful word, feisty."

During 1988 and 1989, Davis was honored for her career achievements, receiving the Kennedy Center Honor, the Legion of Honor from France, the Campione d'Italia from Italy and the Film Society of Lincoln Center Lifetime Achievement Award. She appeared on British television in a special broadcast from the South Bank Centre, discussing film and her career, the other guest being the renowned Russian director, Andrei Tarkovsky.

She collapsed during the American Cinema Awards in 1989 and later discovered that her cancer had returned. She recovered sufficiently to travel to Spain, where she was honored at the Donostia-San Sebastián International Film Festival, but during her visit, her health rapidly deteriorated. Too weak to make the long journey back to the U.S., she traveled to France, where she died on October 6, 1989, at 11:20 pm, at the American Hospital in Neuilly-sur-Seine. Davis was 81 years old.

She was interred in Forest Lawn—Hollywood Hills Cemetery in Los Angeles, alongside her mother, Ruthie, and sister, Bobby, with her name in larger type size. On her tombstone is written: "She did it the hard way," an epitaph that she mentioned in her memoir "Mother Goddam" as having been suggested to her by Joseph L. Mankiewicz shortly after they had filmed "All About Eve."

As early as 1936, Graham Greene summed Davis up: Even the most inconsiderable film ... seemed temporarily better than they were because of that precise, nervy voice, the pale ash-blond hair, the popping, neurotic eyes, a kind of corrupt and phosphorescent prettiness ... I would rather watch Miss Davis than any number of competent pictures.

In 1964, Jack Warner spoke of the "magic quality that transformed this sometimes bland and not beautiful little girl into a great artist", and in a 1988 interview, Davis remarked that, unlike many of her contemporaries, she had forged a career without the benefit of beauty. She admitted she was terrified during the making of her earliest films and that she became tough by necessity. "Until you're known in my profession as a monster, you are not a star," she said, "[but] I've never fought for anything in a treacherous way. I've never fought for anything but the good of the film." During the making of "All About Eve" (1950), Joseph L. Mankiewicz told her of the perception in Hollywood that she was difficult, and she explained that when the audience saw her on screen, they did not consider that her appearance was the result of numerous people working behind the scenes. If she was presented as "a horse's ass ... forty feet wide, and thirty feet high", that is all the audience "would see or care about".

While lauded for her achievements, Davis and her films were sometimes derided; Pauline Kael described "Now, Voyager" (1942) as a "shlock classic", and by the mid-1940s her sometimes mannered and histrionic performances had become the subject of caricature. Edwin Schallert for the "Los Angeles Times" praised Davis' performance in "Mr. Skeffington" (1944), while observing, "the mimics will have more fun than a box of monkeys imitating Miss Davis", and Dorothy Manners at the "Los Angeles Examiner" said of her performance in the poorly received "Beyond the Forest" (1949), "no night club caricaturist has ever turned in such a cruel imitation of the Davis mannerisms as Bette turns on herself in this one." "Time" magazine noted that Davis was compulsively watchable even while criticizing her acting technique, summarizing her performance in "Dead Ringer" (1964) with the observation, "her acting, as always, isn't really acting: it's shameless showing off. But just try to look away!"

Davis attracted a following in the gay subculture and was frequently imitated by female impersonators such as Tracey Lee and Charles Pierce. Attempting to explain her popularity with gay audiences, the journalist Jim Emerson wrote, "Was she just a camp figurehead because her brittle, melodramatic style of acting hadn't aged well? Or was it that she was 'Larger Than Life,' a tough broad who had survived? Probably some of both."

Her film choices were often unconventional: Davis sought roles as manipulators and killers in an era when actresses usually preferred to play sympathetic characters, and she excelled in them. She favored authenticity over glamour and was willing to change her own appearance if it suited the character.
As she entered old age, Davis was acknowledged for her achievements. John Springer, who had arranged her speaking tours of the early 1970s, wrote that despite the accomplishments of many of her contemporaries, Davis was ""the" star of the thirties and into the forties", achieving notability for the variety of her characterizations and her ability to assert herself, even when her material was mediocre. Individual performances continued to receive praise; in 1987, Bill Collins analyzed "The Letter" (1940), and described her performance as "a brilliant, subtle achievement", and wrote, "Bette Davis makes Leslie Crosbie one of the most extraordinary females in movies." In a 2000 review for "All About Eve" (1950), Roger Ebert noted, "Davis was a character, an icon with a grand style, so even her excesses are realistic." In 2006, "Premiere" magazine ranked her portrayal of Margo Channing in the film as fifth on their list of "100 Greatest Performances of All Time", commenting, "There is something deliciously audacious about her gleeful willingness to play such unattractive emotions as jealousy, bitterness, and neediness." While reviewing "What Ever Happened to Baby Jane?" (1962) in 2008, Ebert asserted that "no one who has seen the film will ever forget her."

A few months before her death in 1989, Davis was one of several actors featured on the cover of "Life" magazine. In a film retrospective that celebrated the films and stars of 1939, "Life" concluded that Davis was the most significant actress of her era, and highlighted "Dark Victory" (1939) as one of the most important films of the year. Her death made front-page news throughout the world as the "close of yet another chapter of the Golden Age of Hollywood." Angela Lansbury summed up the feeling of those of the Hollywood community who attended her memorial service, commenting after a sample from Davis' films was screened, that they had witnessed "an extraordinary legacy of acting in the twentieth century by a real master of the craft" that should provide "encouragement and illustration to future generations of aspiring actors."

In 1977, Davis became the first woman to be honored with the AFI Life Achievement Award. In 1999, the American Film Institute published its list of the "AFI's 100 Years...100 Stars," which was the result of a film-industry poll to determine the "50 Greatest American Screen Legends" in order to raise public awareness and appreciation of classic film. Of the 25 actresses listed, Davis was ranked at number two, behind Katharine Hepburn.

The United States Postal Service honored Davis with a commemorative postage stamp in 2008, marking the 100th anniversary of her birth. The stamp features an image of her in the role of Margo Channing in "All About Eve". The First Day of Issue celebration took place September 18, 2008, at Boston University, which houses an extensive Davis archive. Featured speakers included her son Michael Merrill and Lauren Bacall. In 1997 the executors of her estate, Merrill and Kathryn Sermak, her former assistant, established "The Bette Davis Foundation" which awards college scholarships to promising actors and actresses.

In 1962, Bette Davis became the first person to secure 10 Academy Award nominations for acting. Since then only three people have surpassed this figure, Meryl Streep (with 21 nominations and three wins), Katharine Hepburn (12 nominations and four wins), and Jack Nicholson (12 nominations and three wins).

Steven Spielberg purchased Davis' Oscars for "Dangerous" (1935) and "Jezebel" (1938), when they were offered for auction for $207,500 and $578,000, respectively, and returned them to the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences.

Reference is made to Bette Davis in Bob Dylan's "Desolation Row", and in the song "Celluloid Heroes" by the Kinks. Kim Carnes' "Bette Davis Eyes" was the number-one single of 1981. Davis is mentioned in the 1990 Madonna song "Vogue". She and Cary Grant, another famous actor of the silver-screen era, are mentioned in the song “Silver Screen Romance”, by American rock band Good Charlotte. She, along with Clark Gable and James Dean, are mentioned in the 1999 song "Girl on TV" by the boy band LFO. Industrial Disease (1982) by Dire Straits refers to "Bette Davis knees".

The feud between Davis and Joan Crawford is depicted in Shaun Considine's 1989 book "". It was fueled by competition over film roles, Academy Awards, and Franchot Tone, Davis' co-star in 1935's "Dangerous".
A book by her former assistant Kathryn Sermak, Miss D. and me : Live with the Invincible Bette Davis, was released
in 2017. The book is about the period that Sermak worked for Davis as her personal assistant between the years
1979 till 1989.

Susan Sarandon played Davis in the 2017 first season of the FX anthology television series "Feud", subtitled "Bette and Joan", which focused on the Davis–Crawford rivalry.





</doc>
<doc id="63520" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63520" title="Jane Fonda">
Jane Fonda

Jane Seymour Fonda (born December 21, 1937) is an American actress, writer, political activist, former fashion model and fitness guru. She is a two-time Academy Award winner and two-time BAFTA Award winner. In 2014, she was the recipient of the American Film Institute AFI Life Achievement Award.

Fonda made her Broadway debut in the 1960 play "There Was a Little Girl", for which she received the first of two Tony Award nominations, and made her screen debut later the same year in "Tall Story". She rose to fame in 1960s films such as "Period of Adjustment" (1962), "Walk on the Wild Side" (1962), "Sunday in New York" (1963), "Cat Ballou" (1965), "Barefoot in the Park" (1967) and "Barbarella" (1968). Her first husband was "Barbarella" director Roger Vadim. A seven-time Academy Award nominee, she received her first nomination for "They Shoot Horses, Don't They?" (1969) and went on to win two Best Actress Oscars in the 1970s for "Klute" (1971) and "Coming Home" (1978). Her other nominations were for "Julia" (1977), "The China Syndrome" (1979), "On Golden Pond" (1981) and "The Morning After" (1986). Her other major competitive awards include an Emmy Award for the 1984 TV film "The Dollmaker", two BAFTA Awards for "Julia" and "The China Syndrome" and four Golden Globe Awards.

In 1982, she released her first exercise video, "Jane Fonda's Workout", which became the highest-selling video of the time. It would be the first of 22 workout videos released by her over the next 13 years which would collectively sell over 17 million copies. Divorced from second husband Tom Hayden, she married billionaire media mogul Ted Turner in 1991 and retired from acting. Fonda and Turner divorced in 2001. She returned to acting with her first film in 15 years, the 2005 comedy "Monster in Law". Subsequent films have included "Georgia Rule" (2007), "The Butler" (2013), "This Is Where I Leave You" (2014) and "Youth" (2015). In 2009, she returned to Broadway after a 45-year absence, in the play "33 Variations" which earned her a Tony Award nomination, while her recurring role in the HBO drama series "The Newsroom" (2012–2014) earned her two Emmy Award nominations. She also released another five exercise videos between 2010 and 2012. She stars with Lily Tomlin, Sam Waterston and Martin Sheen in the Netflix original series "Grace and Frankie", which premiered in 2015.
In 2017, she was awarded the Golden Lion for Lifetime Achievement at the 74th "Venice Film Festival"

Fonda was a visible political activist in the counterculture era during the Vietnam War and later became involved in advocacy for women. She was famously and controversially photographed sitting on an anti-aircraft gun on a 1972 visit to Hanoi. She has also protested the Iraq War and violence against women, and describes herself as a feminist. In 2005, she, Robin Morgan and Gloria Steinem co-founded the Women's Media Center, an organization that works to amplify the voices of women in the media through advocacy, media and leadership training, and the creation of original content. Fonda serves on the board of the organization.

Jane Seymour Fonda was born in New York City on December 21, 1937. Her parents were Canadian-born socialite Frances Ford Brokaw (née Seymour; 1908–1950), and actor Henry Fonda (1905–1982). According to her father, their surname came from an Italian ancestor who immigrated to the Netherlands in the 1500s. There, he intermarried, and the family began to use Dutch given names, with Jane's first Fonda ancestor reaching New York in 1650. She also has English, Scottish, and French ancestry. She was named after the third wife of Henry VIII, Jane Seymour, to whom she is distantly related on her mother's side. She has a brother, Peter, who is also an actor, and a maternal half-sister, Frances de Villers Brokaw (aka "Pan"), whose daughter is Pilar Corrias, the owner of the Pilar Corrias Gallery in London.

In 1950, when Fonda was twelve, her mother committed suicide while undergoing treatment at Craig House psychiatric hospital in Beacon, New York. Later that year, Fonda's father married socialite Susan Blanchard (born 1928), just nine years his daughter's senior; this marriage ended in divorce. At 15 Fonda taught dance at Fire Island Pines, New York. She attended Greenwich Academy in Greenwich, Connecticut.

Fonda attended the Emma Willard School in Troy, New York, and Vassar College in Poughkeepsie, where she was an undistinguished student. Before her acting career, she was a model, appearing twice on the cover of "Vogue".

Fonda became interested in acting in 1954, while appearing with her father in a charity performance of "The Country Girl" at the Omaha Community Playhouse. After dropping out of Vassar, she went to Paris for two years to study art. Upon returning to the states, in 1958, she met Lee Strasberg and the meeting changed the course of her life, Fonda saying, "I went to the Actors Studio and Lee Strasberg told me I had talent. Real talent. It was the first time that anyone, except my father – who had to say so – told me I was good. At anything. It was a turning point in my life. I went to bed thinking about acting. I woke up thinking about acting. It was like the roof had come off my life!"

Her stage work in the late 1950s laid the foundation for her film career in the 1960s. She averaged almost two movies a year throughout the decade, starting in 1960 with "Tall Story", in which she recreated one of her Broadway roles as a college cheerleader pursuing a basketball star, played by Anthony Perkins. "Period of Adjustment" and "Walk on the Wild Side" followed in 1962. In "Walk on the Wild Side", Fonda played a prostitute and earned a Golden Globe for Most Promising Newcomer.

In 1963, she appeared in "Sunday in New York". "Newsday" called her "the loveliest and most gifted of all our new young actresses". However, she also had detractors – in the same year, the "Harvard Lampoon" named her the "Year's Worst Actress" for "The Chapman Report". Fonda's career breakthrough came with "Cat Ballou" (1965), in which she played a schoolmarm turned outlaw. This comedy Western received five Oscar nominations, with Lee Marvin winning best actor, and was one of the year's top ten films at the box office. It was considered by many to have been the film that brought Fonda to bankable stardom. After this came the comedies "Any Wednesday" (1966), opposite Jason Robards and Dean Jones, and "Barefoot in the Park" (1967), co-starring Robert Redford.

In 1968, she played the title role in the science fiction spoof "Barbarella", which established her status as a sex symbol. In contrast, the tragedy "They Shoot Horses, Don't They?" (1969) won her critical acclaim, and she earned her first Oscar nomination for the role. Fonda was very selective by the end of the 1960s, turning down lead roles in "Rosemary's Baby" and "Bonnie and Clyde", which went to Mia Farrow and Faye Dunaway, respectively.

Fonda won her first Academy Award for Best Actress in 1971, again playing a prostitute, the gamine Bree Daniels, in the murder mystery "Klute". She won a Golden Globe Award for Best Actress for "Klute" and another in 1978 for "Coming Home" as well as another Academy Award for Best Actress in 1978, for the story of a disabled Vietnam War veteran's difficulty in re-entering civilian life.

Between "Klute" in 1971 and "Fun With Dick and Jane" in 1977, Fonda did not have a major film success. She appeared in "A Doll's House" (1973), "Steelyard Blues" and "The Blue Bird" (1976). From comments ascribed to her in interviews, some have inferred that she personally blamed the situation on anger at her outspoken political views: "I can't say I was blacklisted, but I was greylisted." However, in her 2005 autobiography, "My Life So Far", she rejected such simplification. "The suggestion is that because of my actions against the war my career had been destroyed ... But the truth is that my career, far from being destroyed after the war, flourished with a vigor it had not previously enjoyed." She reduced acting because of her political activism providing a new focus in her life. Her return to acting in a series of 'issue-driven' films reflected this new focus.

In 1972, Fonda starred as a reporter alongside Yves Montand in "Tout Va Bien", directed by Jean-Luc Godard and Jean-Pierre Gorin. The two directors then made "Letter to Jane", in which the two spent nearly an hour discussing a news photograph of Fonda.

Through her production company, IPC Films, she produced films that helped return her to star status. The 1977 comedy film "Fun With Dick and Jane" is generally considered her "comeback" picture. Also in 1977, she portrayed the playwright Lillian Hellman in "Julia", receiving positive reviews, BAFTA and Golden Globe Awards for Best Actress, and an Oscar nomination. During this period, Fonda announced that she would make only films that focused on important issues, and she generally stuck to her word. She turned down "An Unmarried Woman" because she felt the part was not relevant. She won another BAFTA Award for Best Actress in 1979 with "The China Syndrome", about a cover-up of a vulnerability in a nuclear power plant. The same year, she starred in "The Electric Horseman" with her previous co-star, Robert Redford.

In 1980, Fonda starred in "9 to 5" with Lily Tomlin and Dolly Parton. The film was a huge critical and box office success, becoming the second highest-grossing release of the year. Fonda had long wanted to work with her father, hoping it would help their strained relationship. She achieved this goal when she purchased the screen rights to the play "On Golden Pond," specifically for her father and her. "On Golden Pond", which also starred Katharine Hepburn, brought Henry Fonda his only Academy Award for Best Actor, which Jane accepted on his behalf, as he was ill and could not leave home. He died five months later.

Fonda continued to appear in feature films throughout the 1980s, winning an Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actress (1984) for "The Dollmaker", and starring in the role of Dr. Martha Livingston in "Agnes of God" (1985). She was nominated for yet another Academy Award for Best Actress for her portrayal of an alcoholic murder suspect in the thriller "The Morning After", opposite Jeff Bridges. She ended the decade by appearing in "Old Gringo". This was followed by the romantic drama "Stanley & Iris" (1990) with Robert De Niro, which was her final film for 15 years.

For many years Fonda took ballet class to keep fit, but after fracturing her foot while filming "The China Syndrome", she was no longer able to participate. To compensate, she began participating in aerobics and strengthening exercises under the direction of Leni Cazden. The "Leni Workout" became the "Jane Fonda Workout," which began a second career for her, continuing for many years. This was considered one of the influences that started the fitness craze among baby boomers, then approaching middle age. In 1982, Fonda released her first exercise video, titled "Jane Fonda's Workout", inspired by her best-selling book, "Jane Fonda's Workout Book". "Jane Fonda's Workout" became the highest selling home video of the next few years, selling over a million copies. The video's release led many people to buy the then-new VCR in order to watch and perform the workout at home. The exercise videos were produced and directed by Sidney Galanty, who helped to put the deal together with video distributor Stuart Karl, of Karl Home Video. Galanty produced the first video and 11 more after that. She would subsequently release 23 workout videos with the series selling a total of 17 million copies combined, more than any other exercise series. She released five workout books and thirteen audio programs, through 1995. After a fifteen-year hiatus, she released two new fitness videos on DVD in 2010, aiming at an older audience.

In the early 1990s, after three decades in film, Fonda announced her retirement from the film industry. In May 2005, she returned to the screen with the box office success "Monster-in-Law", starring opposite Jennifer Lopez. Two years later, Fonda starred in the Garry Marshall-directed drama "Georgia Rule" alongside Felicity Huffman and Lindsay Lohan.

In 2009, Fonda returned to Broadway, first time since 1963, playing Katherine Brandt in Moisés Kaufman's "33 Variations". The role earned her a Tony nomination for Best Performance by a Leading Actress in a Play.

Fonda filmed her second movie in French when she had a leading role in the 2011 drama "All Together". The same year she starred alongside Catherine Keener in "Peace, Love and Misunderstanding", playing a hippie grandmother. In 2012, Fonda began a recurring role as Leona Lansing, CEO of a major media company, in HBO's original political drama "The Newsroom". Her role continued throughout the show's three seasons, and Fonda received two Emmy nominations for Outstanding Guest Actress in a Drama Series.

In 2013, Fonda had a small role in "The Butler", portraying First Lady Nancy Reagan. She had more film work the following year, appearing in the comedies "Better Living Through Chemistry" and "This is Where I Leave You". She also voiced a character on "The Simpsons". She played an acting diva in Paolo Sorrentino's "Youth" in 2015, for which she earned a Golden Globe Award nomination. Her upcoming film roles include "Fathers and Daughters" with Russell Crowe.

Fonda appears as the co-lead in the Netflix series "Grace and Frankie". She and Lily Tomlin play aging women whose husbands reveal they are in love. Filming on the first season was completed in November 2014, and the show premiered online on May 8, 2015. In 2016 Fonda voiced Shuriki in "Elena and the Secret of Avalor".

In June 2016, the Human Rights Campaign released a video in tribute to the victims of the 2016 Orlando gay nightclub shooting; in the video, Fonda and others told the stories of the people killed there.

During the 1960s, Fonda engaged in political activism in support of the Civil Rights Movement, and in opposition to the Vietnam War. Fonda's visits to France brought her into contact with leftist French intellectuals who were opposed to war, an experience that she later characterized as "small-c communism". Along with other celebrities, she supported the Alcatraz Island occupation by American Indians in 1969, which was intended to call attention to the failures of the government with regards to treaty rights and the movement for greater Indian sovereignty.

She supported Huey Newton and the Black Panthers in the early 1970s, stating: "Revolution is an act of love; we are the children of revolution, born to be rebels. It runs in our blood." She called the Black Panthers "our revolutionary vanguard ... we must support them with love, money, propaganda and risk." She has been involved in the feminist movement since the 1970s and dovetails her activism in support of civil rights.

In April 1970, Fonda, with Fred Gardner and Donald Sutherland formed the FTA tour ("Free The Army", a play on the troop expression "Fuck The Army"), an anti-war road show designed as an answer to Bob Hope's USO tour. The tour, described as "political vaudeville" by Fonda, visited military towns along the West Coast, with the goal of establishing a dialogue with soldiers about their upcoming deployments to Vietnam. The dialogue was made into a movie ("F.T.A.") which contained strong, frank criticism of the war by servicemen and servicewomen; it was released in 1972.

On May 4, 1970, Fonda appeared before an assembly at the University of New Mexico, in Albuquerque, to speak on GI rights and issues. The end of her presentation was met with a discomforting silence. The quiet was broken when Beat poet Gregory Corso staggered onto the stage. Drunk, Corso challenged Fonda, using a four-letter expletive: Why hadn't she addressed the shooting of four students at Kent State by the Ohio National Guard, which had just taken place? Fonda in her autobiography revisited the incident: "I was shocked by the news and felt like a fool." On the same day, she joined a protest march on the home of university president, Ferrel Heady. The protestors called themselves "They Shoot Students, Don't They?" – a reference to Fonda's recently released film, "They Shoot Horses, Don't They?" which had just been screened in Albuquerque.

In the same year, Fonda spoke out against the war at a rally organized by Vietnam Veterans Against the War (VVAW) in Valley Forge, Pennsylvania. She offered to help raise funds for VVAW and, for her efforts, was rewarded with the title of Honorary National Coordinator. On November 3, 1970, Fonda started a tour of college campuses on which she raised funds for the organization. As noted by "The New York Times", Fonda was a "major patron" of the VVAW. 

Between 1965 and 1972, almost 300 Americans – mostly civil rights activists, teachers and pastors – traveled to North Vietnam to see firsthand the war situation with the Vietnamese. News media in the United States would only provide the official view from Washington, and American travelers to Vietnam were routinely harassed upon their return to the States. Fonda also visited Vietnam, traveling to Hanoi in July 1972 to witness firsthand the bombing damage to the dikes. After touring and photographing dike systems in North Vietnam, she said the United States had been intentionally targeting the dike system along the Red River. Columnist Joseph Kraft, who was also touring North Vietnam, said he believed the damage to the dikes was incidental and was being used as propaganda by Hanoi, and that, if the U.S. Air Force were "truly going after the dikes, it would do so in a methodical, not a harum-scarum way". Sweden's ambassador to Vietnam, however, observed the bomb damage to the dikes and described it as "methodic". Other journalists reported that the attacks were "aimed at the whole system of dikes".

Fonda was photographed seated on an anti-aircraft gun; the controversial photo outraged a number of Americans, and earned her the nickname "Hanoi Jane". In her 2005 autobiography, she wrote that she was manipulated into sitting on the battery; she had been horrified at the implications of the pictures and regretted taking them. In a 2011 entry at her official website, Fonda explained:
It happened on my last day in Hanoi. I was exhausted and an emotional wreck after the 2-week visit ... The translator told me that the soldiers wanted to sing me a song. He translated as they sung. It was a song about the day 'Uncle Ho' declared their country's independence in Hanoi's Ba Dinh Square. I heard these words: 'All men are created equal; they are given certain rights; among these are life, Liberty and Happiness.' These are the words Ho pronounced at the historic ceremony. I began to cry and clap. 'These young men should not be our enemy. They celebrate the same words Americans do.' The soldiers asked me to sing for them in return ... I memorized a song called 'Day Ma Di', written by anti-war South Vietnamese students. I knew I was slaughtering it, but everyone seemed delighted that I was making the attempt. I finished. Everyone was laughing and clapping, including me ... Here is my best, honest recollection of what happened: someone (I don't remember who) led me towards the gun, and I sat down, still laughing, still applauding. It all had nothing to do with where I was sitting. I hardly even thought about where I was sitting. The cameras flashed ... It is possible that it was a set up, that the Vietnamese had it all planned. I will never know. But if they did I can't blame them. The buck stops here. If I was used, I allowed it to happen ... a two-minute lapse of sanity that will haunt me forever ... But the photo exists, delivering its message regardless of what I was doing or feeling. I carry this heavy in my heart. I have apologized numerous times for any pain I may have caused servicemen and their families because of this photograph. It was never my intention to cause harm.

Fonda made radio broadcasts on Hanoi Radio throughout her two-week tour, commenting on her visits to villages, hospitals, schools, and factories damaged in the war and denouncing U.S. military policy in Vietnam. Fonda has defended her decision to travel to North Vietnam, and her radio broadcasts. During the course of her visit, Fonda visited American prisoners of war (POWs), and brought back messages from them to their families. When stories of torture of returning POWs were later being publicized by the Nixon administration, Fonda called the returning POWs "hypocrites and liars and pawns", adding about the prisoners she visited, "These were not men who had been tortured. These were not men who had been starved. These were not men who had been brainwashed." In addition, Fonda told "The New York Times" in 1973, "I'm quite sure that there were incidents of torture ... but the pilots who were saying it was the policy of the Vietnamese and that it was systematic, I believe that's a lie." Her visits to the POW camp led to persistent and exaggerated rumors which were repeated widely in the press and continued to circulate on the Internet decades later. Fonda, as well as the named POWs, have personally denied the rumors, and subsequent interviews with the POWs showed these rumored allegations to be false as the persons named had never met Fonda.

In 1972, Fonda helped fund and organize the Indochina Peace Campaign, which continued to mobilize antiwar activists across the nation after the 1973 Paris Peace Agreement, through 1975, when the United States withdrew from Vietnam.

Because of her tour of North Vietnam during wartime and the subsequent rumors circulated about her visit, resentment against her among some veterans and currently serving U.S. military still exists. For example, when U.S. Naval Academy plebes, who had not yet been born when Fonda protested against the Vietnam war, shouted out "Goodnight, Jane Fonda!", the company replied "Goodnight, bitch!" This practice has since been prohibited by the academy's "Plebe Summer Standard Operating Procedures". In 2005, Michael A. Smith, a U.S. Navy veteran, was arrested for disorderly conduct in Kansas City, Missouri, after he spat chewing tobacco in Fonda's face during a book-signing event for her autobiography, "My Life So Far". He told reporters that he "consider[ed] it a debt of honor", adding "she spit in our faces for 37 years. It was absolutely worth it. There are a lot of veterans who would love to do what I did." Fonda refused to press charges.

In a 1988 interview with Barbara Walters, Fonda expressed regret for some of her comments and actions, stating:I would like to say something, not just to Vietnam veterans in New England, but to men who were in Vietnam, who I hurt, or whose pain I caused to deepen because of things that I said or did. I was trying to help end the killing and the war, but there were times when I was thoughtless and careless about it and I'm very sorry that I hurt them. And I want to apologize to them and their families. [...] I will go to my grave regretting the photograph of me in an anti-aircraft gun, which looks like I was trying to shoot at American planes. It hurt so many soldiers. It galvanized such hostility. It was the most horrible thing I could possibly have done. It was just thoughtless.

Some critics responded that her apology came at a time when a group of New England Veterans had launched a campaign to disrupt a film project she was working on, leading to the charge that her apology was motivated at least partly by self-interest.

In a "60 Minutes" interview on March 31, 2005, Fonda reiterated that she had no regrets about her trip to North Vietnam in 1972, with the exception of the anti-aircraft-gun photo. She stated that the incident was a "betrayal" of American forces and of the "country that gave me privilege". Fonda said, "The image of Jane Fonda, Barbarella, Henry Fonda's daughter ... sitting on an enemy aircraft gun was a betrayal ... the largest lapse of judgment that I can even imagine." She later distinguished between regret over the use of her image as propaganda and pride for her anti-war activism: "There are hundreds of American delegations that had met with the POWs. Both sides were using the POWs for propaganda ... It's not something that I will apologize for." Fonda said she had no regrets about the broadcasts she made on Radio Hanoi, something she asked the North Vietnamese to do: "Our government was lying to us and men were dying because of it, and I felt I had to do anything that I could to expose the lies and help end the war."

In 2013, it was revealed that Fonda was one of approximately 1,600 Americans whose communications between 1967 and 1973 were monitored by the United States National Security Agency (NSA) as part of Project Minaret, a program that some NSA officials have described as "disreputable if not downright illegal". Fonda's communications, as well as those of her husband, Tom Hayden, were intercepted by Britain's Government Communications Headquarters (GCHQ). Under the UKUSA Agreement, intercepted data on Americans were sent to the U.S. government.

In early March 2017, in an interview with Brie Larson, published by "People" magazine, Fonda stated, "One of the great things the women's movement has done is to make us realise that (rape and abuse is) not our fault. We were violated and it's not right." She said, "I’ve been raped, I’ve been sexually abused as a child and I’ve been fired because I wouldn’t sleep with my boss." She said, "I always thought it was my fault; that I didn’t do or say the right thing. I know young girls who’ve been raped and didn’t even know it was rape. They think, ‘It must have been because I said ‘no’ the wrong way.’"

Through her work, Fonda said she wants to help abuse victims "realize that [rape and abuse] is not our fault". Fonda said that her difficult past led her to become such a passionate activist for women’s rights. The actress is an active supporter of the V-Day movement, which works to stop violence against women and girls. In 2001, she established the Jane Fonda Center for Adolescent Reproductive Health, which aims to help prevent teen pregnancy. She was a victim of the "disease to please" in her early life, which plagued many American females of her generation. Fonda revealed in 2014 that her mother, Frances Ford Seymour, was recurrently sexually abused as young as eight, and this may have led to her suicide when Jane was 12.

Fonda has been a longtime supporter of feminist causes, including V-Day, a movement to stop violence against women, inspired by the off-Broadway hit "The Vagina Monologues", of which she is an honorary chairperson. She was at the first summit in 2002, bringing together founder Eve Ensler, Afghan women oppressed by the Taliban, and a Kenyan activist campaigning to save girls from genital mutilation.

In 2001, she established the Jane Fonda Center for Adolescent Reproductive Health at Emory University in Atlanta, Georgia to help prevent adolescent pregnancy through training and program development.

On February 16, 2004, Fonda led a march through Ciudad Juárez, with Sally Field, Eve Ensler and other women, urging Mexico to provide sufficient resources to newly appointed officials helping investigate the murders of hundreds of women in the rough border city. That same year, she served as a mentor to the first all-transgender cast of "The Vagina Monologues".

In the days before the September 17, 2006 Swedish elections, Fonda went to Sweden to support the new political party Feministiskt initiativ in their election campaign.

In "My Life So Far", Fonda stated that she considers patriarchy to be harmful to men as well as women. She also states that for many years, she feared to call herself a feminist, because she believed that all feminists were "anti-male". But now, with her increased understanding of patriarchy, she feels that feminism is beneficial to both men and women, and states that she "still loves men", adding that when she divorced Ted Turner, she felt like she had also divorced the world of patriarchy, and was very happy to have done so.

In April 2016, Fonda said that while she was 'glad' that Bernie Sanders was running, she predicted Hillary Clinton would become the first female president whose win she believed would result in "violent backlash". She went on to say that we need to "help men understand why they are so threatened – and change the way we view masculinity."

Fonda went to Seattle, Washington, in 1970 to support a group of Native Americans who were led by Bernie Whitebear. The group had occupied part of the grounds of Fort Lawton, which was in the process of being surplussed by the United States Army and turned into a park. The group was attempting to secure a land base where they could establish services for the sizable local urban Indian population, protesting that "Indians had a right to part of the land that was originally all theirs." The endeavor succeeded and the Daybreak Star Cultural Center was constructed in the city's Discovery Park.

In addition to environmental reasons, Fonda has been an critic of oil pipelines because of their being built without consent on Native American Land. In 2017, Fonda responded to American President Donald Trump's mandate to resume construction of the controversial North Dakota Pipelines by saying that Trump "does this illegally because he has not gotten consent from the tribes through whose countries this goes" and pointing out that "the U.S. has agreed to treaties that require them to get the consent of the people who are affected, the indigenous people who live there."

In December 2002, Fonda visited Israel and the West Bank as part of a tour focusing on stopping violence against women. She demonstrated with Women in Black against Israel's occupation of the West Bank and Gaza Strip outside the residence of Israel's Prime Minister. She later visited Jewish and Arab doctors, and patients at a Jerusalem hospital, followed by visits to Ramallah to see a physical rehabilitation center and Palestinian refugee camp. She was heckled by three members of Women in Green as she arrived to meet with leading Israeli feminists.

In September 2009, she was one of more than 1,500 signatories to a letter protesting the 2009 Toronto International Film Festival's spotlight on Tel Aviv. The protest letter said that the spotlight on Tel Aviv was part of "the Israeli propaganda machine" because it was supported in part by funding from the Israeli government and had been described by the Israeli Consul General Amir Gissin as being part of a Brand Israel campaign intended to draw attention away from Israel's conflict with the Palestinians. Other signers included actor Danny Glover, musician David Byrne, journalist John Pilger, and authors Alice Walker, Naomi Klein, and Howard Zinn.

Rabbi Marvin Hier of the Simon Wiesenthal Center stated that "People who support letters like this are people who do not support a two-state solution. By calling into question the legitimacy of Tel Aviv, they are supporting a one-state solution, which means the destruction of the State of Israel." Hier continued, saying that "it is clear that the script [the protesters] are reading from might as well have been written by Hamas."

Fonda, in "The Huffington Post", said she regretted some of the language used in the original protest letter and how it "was perhaps too easily misunderstood. It certainly has been wildly distorted. Contrary to the lies that have been circulated, the protest letter was not demonizing Israeli films and filmmakers." She continued, writing "the greatest 're-branding' of Israel would be to celebrate that country's long standing, courageous and robust peace movement by helping to end the blockade of Gaza through negotiations with all parties to the conflict, and by stopping the expansion of West Bank settlements. That's the way to show Israel's commitment to peace, not a PR campaign. There will be no two-state solution unless this happens." Fonda emphasized that she, "in no way, support[s] the destruction of Israel. I am for the two-state solution. I have been to Israel many times and love the country and its people." Several prominent Atlanta Jews subsequently signed a letter to "The Huffington Post" rejecting the vilification of Fonda, who they described as "a strong supporter and friend of Israel".

Fonda argued that the military campaign in Iraq will turn people all over the world against America, and asserted that a global hatred of America would result in more terrorist attacks in the aftermath of the war. In July 2005, Fonda announced plans to make an anti-war bus tour in March 2006 with her daughter and several families of military veterans, saying that some war veterans she had met while on her book tour had urged her to speak out against the Iraq War. She later canceled the tour due to concerns that she would divert attention from Cindy Sheehan's activism.

In September 2005, Fonda was scheduled to join British politician and anti-war activist George Galloway at two stops on his U.S. book tour, Madison, Wisconsin and Chicago. She canceled her appearances at the last minute, citing instructions from her doctors to avoid travel following recent hip surgery.

On January 27, 2007, Fonda participated in an anti-war rally and march held on the National Mall in Washington, D.C., declaring that "silence is no longer an option". Fonda spoke at an anti-war rally earlier in the day at the Navy Memorial, where members of the organization Free Republic picketed in a counter protest.

In the 2004 presidential election, her name was used as a disparaging epithet against John Kerry, a former VVAW leader, who was then the Democratic Party presidential candidate. Republican National Committee Chairman Ed Gillespie called Kerry a "Jane Fonda Democrat". Kerry's opponents also circulated a photograph showing Fonda and Kerry in the same large crowd at a 1970 anti-war rally, though they sat several rows apart. A faked composite photograph, which gave a false impression that the two had shared a speaker's platform, was also circulated.

In 2015, Fonda expressed disapproval of President Barack Obama's permitting of Arctic drilling (Petroleum exploration in the Arctic) at the Sundance Film Festival. In July, she marched in a Toronto protest called the "March for Jobs, Justice, and Climate," which was organized by dozens of nonprofits, labor unions, and environmental activists, including Canadian author Naomi Klein. The march aimed to show businesses and politicians alike that climate change is inherently linked to issues that may seem unrelated.

In addition to issues of Civil Rights, Fonda has been an opponent of oil developments and their adverse effects on the environment. In 2017, while on a trip with Greenpeace to protest oil developments, Fonda criticized Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau saying at the summit on climate change in Paris, known as the Paris agreement, Trudeau "talked so beautifully of needing to meet the requirements of the climate treaty and to respect and hold to the treaties with indigenous people...and yet he has betrayed every one of the things he committed to in Paris."

On April 5, 2005, Random House released Fonda's autobiography "My Life So Far". The book describes her life as a series of three acts, each thirty years long, and declares that her third "act" will be her most significant, partly because of her commitment to the Christian religion, and that it will determine the things for which she will be remembered.

Fonda's autobiography was well received by book critics, and was noted to be "as beguiling and as maddening as Jane Fonda herself" in its "Washington Post" review, pronouncing her a "beautiful bundle of contradictions". "The New York Times" called the book "achingly poignant".

In January 2009, Fonda started chronicling her Broadway return in a blog, with posts about topics ranging from her Pilates class to her fears and excitement about her new play. She uses Twitter and has a Facebook page. In 2011, Fonda published a new book: "Prime Time: Love, health, sex, fitness, friendship, spirit – making the most of all of your life". The book offers stories from her own life as well as from the lives of others, giving her perspective on how to better live what she calls "the critical years from 45 and 50, and especially from 60 and beyond".

Fonda's charitable works have focused on youth and education, adolescent reproductive health, environment, human services, and the arts.

Fonda has established the Georgia Campaign for Adolescent Power and Potential (GCAPP) in the mid 1990s and the Fonda Family Foundation in the late 1990s. In the mid 2000s, Fonda founded the Jane Fonda Foundation in 2004 with one million dollars of her own money as a charitable corporation with herself as president, chair, director and secretary; Fonda contributes 10 hours each week on its behalf.

Jane Fonda has been married three times.

Fonda married her first husband, French film director Roger Vadim, on August 14, 1965, at the Dunes Hotel in Las Vegas. The couple had a daughter, Vanessa, born on September 28, 1968, in Paris, France, and named after the actress and activist Vanessa Redgrave.

On January 19, 1973, three days after obtaining a divorce from Vadim in Santo Domingo, Fonda married activist Tom Hayden in a free-form ceremony at her home in Laurel Canyon. Their son, Troy O'Donovan Garity, was born on July 7, 1973 in Los Angeles and was given his paternal grandmother's maiden name, as the names "Fonda and Hayden carried too much baggage". Fonda and Hayden wanted to give their son a name that "was both American and Vietnamese" and chose "Troy", an Anglicization of the Vietnamese "Troi", as the only name they could think of meeting that requirement. Hayden chose O'Donovan as the middle name after Irish revolutionary Jeremiah O'Donovan Rossa. In 1982, Fonda and Hayden unofficially adopted an African-American teenager, Mary Luana Williams (known as Lulu), who was the daughter of members of the Black Panthers. Fonda and Hayden divorced on June 10, 1990 in Santa Monica.
She married her third husband, cable-television tycoon and CNN founder Ted Turner, on December 21, 1991, at a ranch near Capps, Florida, about 20 miles east of Tallahassee. The pair divorced on May 22, 2001 in Atlanta, Georgia. From 2009 until 2017, Fonda was in a relationship with record producer Richard Perry.

Fonda grew up atheist but turned to Christianity in early 2000s. She describes her beliefs as being "outside of established religion" with a more feminist slant, and views God as something that "lives within each of us as Spirit (or soul)." She practices Zazen meditation and Yoga.

As a child, Fonda suffered from a poor self-image and lack of confidence in her appearance, an issue exacerbated by her father Henry Fonda. On the subject, Fonda said "I was raised in the ‘50s. I was taught by my father [actor Henry Fonda] that how I looked was all that mattered, frankly. He was a good man, and I was mad for him, but he sent messages to me that fathers should not send: Unless you look perfect, you're not going to be loved." In adulthood, Fonda developed bulimia which took a toll on her quality of life for many years, an issue that also affected her mother Frances Ford Seymour who committed suicide when Fonda was 12. On the subject of her recovery from bulimia, Fonda said, "It was in my 40s, and if you suffer from bulimia, the older you get, the worse it gets. It takes longer to recover from a bout...I had a career, I was winning awards, I was supporting nonprofits, I had a family. I had to make a choice: I live or I die." Having been diagnosed with breast cancer, Fonda underwent a lumpectomy in November 2010, and has recovered.

In 1962, Fonda was given the honorary title of "Miss Army Recruiting" by the Pentagon.

In 1981, she was awarded the Women in Film Crystal Award.

In 1994, the United Nations Population Fund made Fonda a Goodwill Ambassador. In 2004, she was awarded the Women's eNews 21 Leaders for the 21st Century award as one of Seven Who Change Their Worlds. In 2007, Fonda was awarded an Honorary Palme d'Or by Cannes Film Festival President Gilles Jacob for career achievement. Only three others had received such an award – Jeanne Moreau, Alain Resnais, and Gerard Oury.

In December 2008, Fonda was inducted into the California Hall of Fame, located at The California Museum for History, Women and the Arts. In December 2009, Fonda received the New York Women's Agenda Lifetime Achievement Award. In November 2009, she received the National German Sustainability Award. She was also selected as the 42nd recipient (2014) of the AFI Life Achievement Award.
In 2017, she received a Goldene Kamera lifetime achievement award.




</doc>
<doc id="206724" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=206724" title="Anne Bancroft">
Anne Bancroft

Anna Maria Louisa Italiano (September 17, 1931 – June 6, 2005), known professionally as Anne Bancroft, was an American actress, director, screenwriter and singer associated with the method acting school, having studied under Lee Strasberg. Respected for her acting prowess and versatility, Bancroft was acknowledged for her work in film, theatre and television. She won one Academy Award, three BAFTA Awards, two Golden Globes, two Tony Awards and two Emmy Awards, and several other awards and nominations.

After her film debut in "Don't Bother to Knock" (1952) and a string of supporting film roles during the 1950s, she won an Academy Award for Best Actress for her lead role in "The Miracle Worker" (1962) as the teacher of teenage Helen Keller, reprising her role in the Broadway stage play. She won both an Oscar for her work in the film, and a Tony for the same role in the play. On Broadway in 1965, she played a medieval nun obsessed with a priest (Jason Robards) in John Whiting's play "The Devils", based on the Aldous Huxley novel "The Devils of Loudun". She was perhaps best known as the seductress, Mrs. Robinson, in "The Graduate" (1967), a role that she later stated had come to overshadow her other work.

Bancroft received several other Oscar nominations and continued in lead roles until the late 1980s.
She played a ballet dancer in "The Turning Point" (1977), and in "Agnes of God" (1985), she played the mother superior of a convent who clashes with a psychiatrist played by Jane Fonda over dealings with a troubled young novice nun played by Meg Tilly. In 1987, she starred with Anthony Hopkins in "84 Charing Cross Road". She appeared in several movies directed or produced by her second husband, comedian Mel Brooks, including the award-winning drama "The Elephant Man" as well as comedies "To Be or Not to Be" and "".

In the 1990s she returned to supporting roles in films, but continued to play lead roles in television films. She received Emmy and Screen Actors Guild Award nominations, for "The Roman Spring of Mrs. Stone" (2003), as well as an Emmy nomination for 2001's "Haven".

Bancroft was born Anna Maria Louisa Italiano in the Bronx, New York, the middle of three daughters of Mildred (née DiNapoli; 1908–2010), a telephone operator, and Michael G. Italiano (1905–2001), a dress pattern maker.

Bancroft's parents were both children of Italian immigrants. In an interview, she stated her family was originally from Muro Lucano, in the province of Potenza. She was brought up Roman Catholic. She was raised in the Belmont neighborhood of the Bronx, later moving to 1580 Zerega Ave. and graduated from Christopher Columbus High School in 1948. She later attended HB Studio, the American Academy of Dramatic Arts, the Actors Studio and the American Film Institute's Directing Workshop for Women at the University of California, Los Angeles. After appearing in a number of live television dramas under the name Anne Marno, she was told to change her surname for her film debut in "Don't Bother to Knock".

In 1958, Bancroft made her Broadway debut as lovelorn, Bronx-accented Gittel Mosca opposite Henry Fonda (as the married man Gittel loves) in William Gibson's two-character play "Two for the Seesaw", directed by Arthur Penn. For Gittel, she won the Tony Award for Best Performance by a Featured Actress in a Play. (Though her role was quite equal to Fonda's, he, an established film actor, was the star, and so she was eligible in the featured category.)

She subsequently won the Tony Award for Best Performance by a Leading Actress in a Play in 1960, again with playwright Gibson and director Penn, when she played Annie Sullivan, the young woman who teaches the child Helen Keller to communicate in "The Miracle Worker". She took the latter role to Hollywood, and won the Academy Award for Best Actress, with Patty Duke repeating her own success as Keller alongside Bancroft in the 1962 film version of the play. She had returned to Broadway to star in "Mother Courage and Her Children", so Joan Crawford accepted Bancroft's Oscar on her behalf, and later presented the award to her in New York. Bancroft is one of the few actors to have won an Academy Award and a Tony Award for the same role. Bancroft co-starred as a medieval nun obsessed with a priest (Jason Robards) in the 1965 Broadway production of John Whiting's play "The Devils". Produced by Alexander H. Cohen and directed by Michael Cacoyannis, it ran for 63 performances.
Bancroft received a second Academy Award nomination in 1965 for her performance in "The Pumpkin Eater". Her best-known role during this period was Mrs. Robinson in "The Graduate" (1967), for which she received a third Academy Award nomination. In the film, she played an unhappily married woman who seduces a family friend, the much younger recent college graduate played by Dustin Hoffman. In the movie, Hoffman's character later dates and falls in love with her daughter. Bancroft was ambivalent about her appearance in "The Graduate"; she stated in several interviews that the role overshadowed all of her other work. Despite her character becoming an archetype of the "older woman" role, Bancroft was only six years older than Hoffman.

A CBS television special, "Annie: the Women in the Life of a Man" (1970), won Bancroft an Emmy Award for her singing and acting. Bancroft is one of very few entertainers to win an Oscar, an Emmy and a Tony award. She followed that success with a second television special, "Annie and The Hoods" (1974), which was telecast on ABC and featured her husband Mel Brooks as a guest star. She made an uncredited cameo in the film "Blazing Saddles" (1974), directed by Brooks. She received a fourth Academy Award nomination for her performance in "The Turning Point" (1977) opposite Shirley MacLaine, and a fifth nomination for her performance in "Agnes of God" (1985) opposite Jane Fonda.

Bancroft made her debut as a screenwriter and director in "Fatso" (1980), in which she starred with Dom DeLuise. Bancroft was also the original choice to play Joan Crawford in the film "Mommie Dearest" (1981), but backed out at the eleventh hour, and was replaced by Faye Dunaway. She was also a front-runner for the role of Aurora Greenway in "Terms of Endearment" (1983), but declined so she could act in the remake of "To Be or Not to Be" (1983), with her husband Mel Brooks.

In the 1990s and the first half of the 2000s, Bancroft took supporting roles in a number of films in which she co-starred with major film stars—including "Honeymoon in Vegas" (1992) with Nicolas Cage, "Love Potion No. 9" (1992) with Sandra Bullock, "Malice" (1993) with Nicole Kidman, "Point of No Return" (1993) with Bridget Fonda, "Home for the Holidays" (1995) with Robert Downey Jr. and directed by Jodie Foster, "How to Make an American Quilt" (1995) with Winona Ryder, "G.I. Jane" (1997) with Demi Moore, "Great Expectations" (1998) with Gwyneth Paltrow, "Keeping the Faith" (2000) with Ben Stiller, and "Heartbreakers" (2001) with Jennifer Love Hewitt, Sigourney Weaver and Gene Hackman. She also lent her voice to the animated film "Antz" (1998), which also featured performances from Jennifer Lopez, Sharon Stone, and Woody Allen.

Bancroft also starred in several television movies and miniseries, receiving six Emmy Award nominations (winning twice), eight Golden Globe nominations (winning twice), and two Screen Actors Guild Awards. Her final appearance was as herself in a 2004 episode of HBO's "Curb Your Enthusiasm". Her last project was the animated feature "Delgo", released posthumously in 2008. The film was dedicated to her.

She received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame at 6368 Hollywood Boulevard, for her work in television. At the time of her star's installation (1960), she had recently appeared in several TV series. Bancroft is also a member of the American Theater Hall of Fame, having been inducted in 1992.

Bancroft's first husband was lawyer Martin May; they married in 1953, separated in 1955, and divorced in 1957.

In 1961, Bancroft met Mel Brooks at a rehearsal for the Perry Como variety show ("Kraft Music Hall"). Bancroft and Brooks married on August 5, 1964, at the Manhattan Marriage Bureau near New York City Hall, and remained married until her death. Their son, Maximillian "Max" Brooks, was born on May 22, 1972.

Bancroft and Mel Brooks were seen three times on the screen together: once dancing a tango in Brooks's "Silent Movie" (1976); in his remake of "To Be or Not to Be" (1983); and in the episode entitled "Opening Night" (2004) of the HBO show, "Curb Your Enthusiasm". They were also in "" (1995), but never appeared together. Brooks produced the film "The Elephant Man" (1980), in which Bancroft acted. He also was executive-producer for the film "84 Charing Cross Road" (1987) in which she starred. Both Brooks and Bancroft appeared in season six of "The Simpsons". According to the DVD commentary, when Bancroft came to record her lines for the episode "Fear of Flying", the "Simpsons" writers asked if Brooks had come with her (which he had); she joked, "I can't get rid of him!"

In a 2010 interview, Brooks credited Bancroft as being the guiding force behind his involvement in developing "The Producers" and "Young Frankenstein" for the musical theatre. In the same interview, he said of their first meeting in 1961, "From that day, until her death on June 5, 2005, we were glued together."

In April 2005, two months before her death, Bancroft became a grandmother when her daughter-in-law Michelle gave birth to a boy, Henry Michael Brooks.

Anne Bancroft died of uterine cancer at age 73 on June 6, 2005, at Mount Sinai Hospital in Manhattan. Her death surprised many, including some of her friends, as the intensely private Bancroft had not released details of her illness. She was survived by her mother, sisters, husband Mel Brooks, and son Max Brooks. She is interred at Kensico Cemetery in Valhalla, New York, near her parents, Mildred (who died in April 2010, five years after Anne) and Michael Italiano. A white marble monument with a weeping angel adorns her grave. Her last film, "Delgo", was dedicated to her memory.



</doc>
<doc id="18220755" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18220755" title="Holly Hunter">
Holly Hunter

Holly Hunter (born March 20, 1958) is an American actress and producer. For her performance as Ada McGrath in the 1993 film "The Piano", she won the Academy Award for Best Actress, BAFTA Award for Best Actress in a Leading Role, AACTA Award for Best Actress in a Leading Role, Golden Globe Award for Best Actress – Motion Picture Drama, and the Cannes Best Actress Award. She was also nominated for the Academy Award for Best Actress for "Broadcast News" (1987), and the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress for "The Firm" (1993) and "Thirteen" (2003).

A seven-time Emmy Award nominee, Hunter won Emmys for "Roe vs. Wade" (1989) and "The Positively True Adventures of the Alleged Texas Cheerleader-Murdering Mom" (1993). She also starred in the TNT drama series "Saving Grace" (2007–10). Her other film roles include "Raising Arizona" (1987), "Always" (1989), "Copycat" (1995), "Crash" (1996), "O Brother, Where Art Thou?" (2000), "The Incredibles" (2004), "" (2016) and "The Big Sick" (2017).

Hunter was born in Conyers, Georgia, the daughter of Opal Marguerite (née Catledge), a housewife, and Charles Edwin Hunter, a farmer and sporting-goods manufacturer's representative. Hunter earned a degree in drama from Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh, and for a while performed in the theatre scene there, playing ingenue roles at City Theatre, then named the City Players. 

She eventually moved to New York City and roomed with fellow actress Frances McDormand. Hunter, in 2008, described living in The Bronx "at the end of the D [subway] train, just off 205th Street, on Bainbridge Avenue and Hull Avenue. It was very Irish, and then you could go just a few blocks away and hit major Italian." A chance encounter with playwright Beth Henley, when the two were trapped alone in an elevator, led to Hunter's being cast in Henley's plays "Crimes of the Heart" (succeeding Mary Beth Hurt on Broadway), and Off-Broadway's "The Miss Firecracker Contest". "It was like the beginning of 1982. It was on 49th Street between Broadway and Eighth [Avenue] ... on the south side of the street," Hunter recalled in an interview. "[We were trapped] 10 minutes; not long. We actually had a nice conversation. It was just the two of us."

Hunter made her film debut in the 1981 horror movie "The Burning". After moving to Los Angeles in 1982, Hunter appeared in TV movies before being cast in a supporting role in 1984's "Swing Shift". That year, she had her first collaboration with the writing-directing-producing team of brothers Ethan Coen and Joel Coen, in "Blood Simple", making an uncredited appearance as a voice on an answering-machine recording. More film and television work followed until 1987, when thanks to a starring role in the Coens' "Raising Arizona" and her Academy Award-nominated turn in "Broadcast News", Hunter became a critically acclaimed star. She went on to the screen adaptation of Henley's "Miss Firecracker"; Steven Spielberg's "Always", a romantic drama with Richard Dreyfuss; and the made-for-TV 1989 docudrama about the Supreme Court case "Roe v. Wade".

Following her second collaboration with Dreyfuss, in "Once Around", Hunter garnered critical attention for her work in two 1993 films, resulting in her being nominated for two Academy Awards the same year: Hunter's performance in "The Firm" won her a nomination as Best Supporting Actress, while her portrayal of a mute Scottish woman entangled in an adulterous affair with Harvey Keitel in Jane Campion's "The Piano" won her the Best Actress award.

Hunter went on to star in the comedy-drama "Home for the Holidays" and the thriller "Copycat", both in 1995. She also appeared in David Cronenberg's "Crash" and as a sardonic angel in "A Life Less Ordinary". The following year, she played a recently divorced New Yorker in Richard LaGravenese's "Living Out Loud"; starring alongside Danny DeVito, Queen Latifah, and Martin Donovan. Hunter rounded out the 1990s with a minor role in the independent drama "Jesus' Son" and as a housekeeper torn between a grieving widower and his son in Kiefer Sutherland's drama "Woman Wanted".

Following a supporting role in the Coens' "O Brother, Where Art Thou?", Hunter took top billing in the same year's television movie "Harlan County War", an account of labor struggles among Kentucky coal-mine workers. Hunter would continue her small screen streak with a role in "When Billie Beat Bobby", playing tennis pro Billie Jean King in the fact-based story of King's famed exhibition match with Bobby Riggs; and as narrator of "Eco Challenge New Zealand" before returning to film work with a minor role in the 2002 drama "Moonlight Mile". 

The following year found Hunter in the redemption drama "Levity". Also in 2003, Hunter had the role of a mother named Melanie Freeland, whose daughter is troubled and going through the perils of being a teenager in the film "Thirteen". The film was critically acclaimed along with Hunter and her co-stars and earned her nominations for the Academy Award and Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actress.

In 2004, Hunter starred alongside Brittany Murphy in the romantic satire "Little Black Book", and the same year she voiced Helen Parr aka Elastigirl in the action animation superhero film "The Incredibles", where she has also voiced her in the "Disney Infinity" video game series, she will reprise the role again in the upcoming 2018 sequel. In 2005, Hunter starred alongside Robin Williams in the black comedy-drama "The Big White".

Hunter became an executive producer, and helped develop a starring vehicle for herself with the TNT cable-network drama "Saving Grace", which premiered in July 2007. For her acting, she received a Golden Globe Award nomination, two Screen Actors Guild Award nominations, and an Emmy Award nomination. On May 30, 2008, Hunter received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame. In 2009, she was awarded the Women in Film Lucy Award. In 2016, Hunter played Senator Finch in "". Hunter's likeness was used to portray Senator Finch in the "" tie-in prequel comics, released by Dr. Pepper on February 3, 2016.

Hunter is unable to hear with her left ear due to a childhood case of the mumps. The condition sometimes leads to complications at work. Some scenes have to be altered from the script for her to use her right ear.

Hunter was married to Janusz Kamiński, cinematographer of "Schindler's List" and "Saving Private Ryan" from 1995 until 2001.

Hunter has been in a relationship with British actor Gordon MacDonald since 2001. The couple met in San Jose Repertory Theatre's production of playwright Marina Carr's "By the Bog of Cats", in which she played a woman abandoned by her lover of 14 years, played by MacDonald. In January 2006, Hunter's publicist announced that Hunter had given birth to the couple's twin boys Claude and Press.

Hunter is not religious and identifies as an agnostic theist.



</doc>
<doc id="52707" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52707" title="Kate Winslet">
Kate Winslet

Kate Elizabeth Winslet, (born 5 October 1975) is an English actress. She is known for her portrayals of angst-ridden women, typically in period dramas and tragedies. Winslet is the recipient of several accolades, including three British Academy Film Awards, and is among the few performers to have won Academy, Emmy, and Grammy Awards.

Born in Reading, Berkshire, Winslet studied drama at the Redroofs Theatre School. Her first screen appearance, at the age of 15, was in the British television series "Dark Season" (1991). She made her film debut playing a teenage murderess in "Heavenly Creatures" (1994), and received her first BAFTA Award for playing Marianne Dashwood in "Sense and Sensibility" (1995). Global stardom followed soon after with her leading role in the epic romance "Titanic" (1997). It was the highest-grossing film of all time to that point, after which she eschewed parts in blockbusters in favour of critically acclaimed but little-seen period pieces, including "Quills" (2000) and "Iris" (2001).

The science fiction romance "Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind" (2004), in which Winslet was cast against type in a contemporary setting, proved to be a turning point in her career, and she gained further recognition for her performances in "Finding Neverland" (2004), "Little Children" (2006), "Revolutionary Road" (2008), and "The Reader" (2008). For playing a Nazi camp guard in the last of these, she won the BAFTA Award and Academy Award for Best Actress. In the 2010s, Winslet played a single mother in 1930s America in the miniseries "Mildred Pierce" (2011), joined the "Divergent" film series, and portrayed Joanna Hoffman in "Steve Jobs" (2015). She won a Primetime Emmy Award for the former and a third BAFTA Award for the latter.

For her narration of a short story in the audiobook "Listen to the Storyteller" (1999), Winslet won a Grammy Award. She performed the song "What If" for the soundtrack of her film "" (2001). A co-founder of the charity Golden Hat Foundation, which aims to create autism awareness, she has written a book on the topic, "The Golden Hat: Talking Back to Autism" (2010). "Time" magazine named her one of the 100 most influential people in the world in 2009, and in 2012, she was appointed Commander of the Order of the British Empire (CBE). Divorced from the film directors Jim Threapleton and Sam Mendes, Winslet has been married to the businessman Ned Rocknroll since 2012. She has a child from each marriage.

Kate Winslet was born on 5 October 1975 in Reading, Berkshire, England, to Sally Anne (née Bridges) and Roger John Winslet. Her mother worked as a nanny and waitress, and her father, a struggling actor, took labouring jobs to support the family. Her maternal grandparents were both actors and ran the Reading Repertory Theatre Company. Winslet has two sisters, Anna and Beth, both of whom are actresses, and a younger brother, Joss. The family had limited financial means; they lived on free meal benefits and were supported by a charity named the Actor's Charitable Trust. When Winslet was 10, her father severely injured his foot in a boating accident and found it harder to work, leading to more financial hardships for the family. Winslet has said that her parents always made them feel cared for and that they were a supportive family.

Winslet attended St Mary and All Saints' Church of England primary school. Living in a family of actors inspired her to pursue acting from a young age. She and her sisters participated in amateur stage shows at school and at a local youth theatre, named Foundations. When she was five, Winslet made her first stage appearance as Mary in her school's production of the Nativity. She has described herself as an overweight child; she was nicknamed "blubber" by her schoolmates and was bullied for the way she looked. She said that she did not let this defeat her. At 11, Winslet was accepted into the Redroofs Theatre School in Maidenhead. The school also functioned as an agency and took students to London to audition for acting jobs. She appeared in a Sugar Puffs commercial and dubbed for foreign films. At school, she was made head girl and took part in productions of "Alice's Adventures in Wonderland" and "The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe", and played the lead role of Wendy Darling in "Peter Pan". She worked simultaneously with the Starmaker Theatre Company in Reading. She participated in over 20 of their stage productions, but was rarely selected as the lead due to her weight. Nonetheless, she played key roles as Miss Agatha Hannigan in "Annie", the Mother Wolf in "The Jungle Book", and Lena Marelli in "Bugsy Malone".

In 1991, within two weeks of finishing her GCSE examinations, Winslet made her screen debut as one of the main cast members of the BBC science fiction television series "Dark Season". Her part was that of Reet, a schoolgirl who helps her classmates fight against a sinister man distributing free computers to her school. She did not earn much from the job, and at 16, a lack of funds forced Winslet to leave Redroofs. To support herself, she worked at a delicatessen. In 1992, she had a small part in the television film "Anglo-Saxon Attitudes", an adaptation of Angus Wilson's satirical novel. Winslet, who weighed at the time, played the daughter of an obese woman in it. While filming, an off-hand comment from the director Diarmuid Lawrence about the likeness between her and the actress who played her mother prompted Winslet to lose weight. She next took on the role of the young daughter of a bankrupt middle-aged man (played by Ray Winstone) in the television sitcom "Get Back" (1992–93). She also had a guest role in a 1993 episode of the medical drama series "Casualty".

Winslet was among 175 girls to audition for Peter Jackson's psychological drama "Heavenly Creatures" (1994), and was cast after impressing Jackson with the intensity she brought to her part. The New Zealand-based production is based on the Parker–Hulme murder case of 1954, in which Winslet played Juliet Hulme, a teenager who assists her friend, Pauline Parker (played by Melanie Lynskey), in the murder of Pauline's mother. She prepared for the part by reading the transcripts of the girls' murder trial, their letters and diaries, and interacted with their acquaintances. She has said that she learnt tremendously from the job. Jackson filmed in the real murder locations, and the experience left Winslet traumatised. She found it difficult to detach herself from her character, and said that after returning home, she often cried. The film was a critical breakthrough for Winslet; "The Washington Post" writer Desson Thomson called her "a bright-eyed ball of fire, lighting up every scene she’s in". Winslet recorded "Juliet's Aria" for the film's soundtrack. Also that year, she appeared as Geraldine Barclay, a prospective secretary, in the Royal Exchange Theatre production of Joe Orton's farce "What the Butler Saw".

While promoting "Heavenly Creatures" in Los Angeles, Winslet auditioned for the minor part of Lucy Steele for a 1995 film adaptation of Jane Austen's novel "Sense and Sensibility", starring and written by Emma Thompson. Impressed by her reading, Thompson cast her for the much larger part of the recklessly romantic teenager Marianne Dashwood. The director Ang Lee wanted Winslet to play the part with grace and restraintaspects that he felt were missing from her performance in "Heavenly Creatures"and thus asked her to practice tai chi, read gothic literature, and learn to play the piano. David Parkinson of the "Radio Times" found Winslet to be a standout among the ensemble cast, and Mick LaSalle of the "San Francisco Chronicle" took note of how well she had portrayed her character's growth and maturity. The film grossed over US$134 million worldwide. She won the Screen Actors Guild and British Academy Film Award for Best Supporting Actress, and received nominations for the Academy Award and Golden Globe Award in the same category.

Winslet had roles in two period dramas of 1996"Jude" and "Hamlet". As with her "Heavenly Creatures" part, Winslet's roles in these films were those of women with a "mad edge". In Michael Winterbottom's "Jude", based on the novel "Jude the Obscure" by Thomas Hardy, she played Sue Bridehead, a young woman with suffragette leanings who falls in love with her cousin, Jude (played by Christopher Eccleston). Roger Ebert believed that the part allowed Winslet to display her acting range, and praised her for the defiance she brought to the role. After unsuccessfully auditioning for Kenneth Branagh's 1994 film "Mary Shelley's Frankenstein", Winslet was cast for the part of Ophelia, the doomed lover of the title character, in Branagh's adaptation of William Shakespeare's tragedy "Hamlet". Winslet, at 20 years old, was intimidated by the experience of performing Shakespeare with established actors such as Branagh and Julie Christie, saying that the job required a level of intellect that she thought she did not possess. Mike Jeffries of "Empire" believed that she had played the part "well beyond her years". Despite the acclaim, "Jude" and "Hamlet" earned little at the box office.

Winslet was keen on playing Rose DeWitt Bukater, a free-spirited socialite aboard the ill-fated RMS "Titanic", in James Cameron's epic romance "Titanic" (1997). Cameron was initially reluctant to cast her, preferring the stars Claire Danes or Gwyneth Paltrow, but Winslet pleaded with him, "You don't understand! I am Rose! I don't know why you're even seeing anyone else!" Her persistence led Cameron to hire her. Leonardo DiCaprio featured as her love interest, Jack. "Titanic" had a production budget of US$200 million, and its arduous principal photography was held at Rosarito Beach where a replica of the ship was created. Filming proved to be taxing for Winslet. She nearly drowned, caught influenza, suffered from hypothermia on being submerged in freezing water, and had bruises on her arms and knees. The workload allowed her only four hours of sleep per day and she felt drained by the experience. David Ansen, writing for "Newsweek", praised Winslet for capturing her character's zeal with delicacy, and Mike Clark of "USA Today" considered her to be the film's prime asset. Against expectations, "Titanic" went on to become the highest-grossing film of all time to that point, earning over US$2 billion in box-office receipts worldwide, and established Winslet as a global star. The film won 11 Academy Awardsthe most for any filmincluding Best Picture and gained Winslet a Best Actress nomination.

Winslet did not view "Titanic" as a platform for bigger salaries. She eschewed parts in blockbuster films in favour of independent productions that were not widely seen, believing that she "still had a lot to learn" and was unprepared to be a star. She later said that her decision ensured career longevity. "Hideous Kinky", a low-budget drama shot before the release of "Titanic", was Winslet's sole film release of 1998. She turned down offers to star in "Shakespeare in Love" (1998) and "Anna and the King" (1999) to do the film. Based on the semi-autobiographical novel by Esther Freud, "Hideous Kinky" tells the story of a single British mother yearning for a new life in 1970s Morocco. Writing for "The New York Times", the critic Janet Maslin commended Winslet's decision to follow-up "Titanic" with such an offbeat project, and took note of how well she had captured her character's "obliviousness and optimism".

Jane Campion's psychological drama "Holy Smoke!" (1999) featured Winslet as an Australian woman who joins an Indian religious cult. She found the script brave and was challenged by the idea of portraying an unlikable, manipulative woman. She learnt an Australian accent and worked closely with Campion to justify her character's vileness. The film required her to perform explicit sex scenes with her co-star Harvey Keitel, and featured a scene in which her character appears stark naked and urinates on herself. David Rooney of "Variety" wrote, "Showing the kind of courage few young thesps would be capable of and an extraordinary range [...] from animal cunning to unhinged desperation, [Winslet] holds nothing back." That same year, she voiced a fairy for the animated film "Faeries", and won the Grammy Award for Best Spoken Word Album for Children for narrating the short story "The Face in the Lake" for the children's audiobook "Listen to the Storyteller".

In "Quills" (2000), a biopic of the erratic Marquis de Sade, starring Geoffrey Rush and Joaquin Phoenix, Winslet played the supporting part of a sexually repressed laundress working in a mental asylum. Hailing her as the "most daring actress working today", James Greenberg of "Los Angeles" magazine praised Winslet for "continuing to explore the bounds of sexual liberation". She received a SAG Award nomination for Best Supporting Actress. The following year, she played a fictitious mathematician involved in the cracking of the Enigma ciphers in Michael Apted's espionage thriller "Enigma". Winslet's character was vastly expanded from a subsidiary love-interest in the novel it was based on to a prominent code-breaker in the film. She was pregnant while filming, and to prevent this from showing, she wore corsets under her costume.

The biopic "Iris" (2001) featured Winslet and Judi Dench as the novelist Iris Murdoch at different ages. The director Richard Eyre cast the two actresses after finding a "correspondence of spirit between them". Winslet was drawn to the idea of playing an intellectual and zesty female lead, and in research, she read Murdoch's novels, studied her husband's memoir "Elegy for Iris", and watched televised interviews of Murdoch. The project was filmed over four weeks and allowed Winslet to bring her daughter, who was six months old at the time, on set. Writing for "The Guardian", Martin Amis commented that "the seriousness and steadiness of [Winslet's] gaze effectively suggest the dawning amplitude of the Murdoch imagination". Winslet received her third Oscar nomination for "Iris", in addition to BAFTA and Golden Globe nominations for Best Supporting Actress.

Winslet's third film release of 2001 was the animated film "", based on Charles Dickens' novel. For the film's soundtrack she sang "What If", which proved to be a commercial hit; she donated her earnings from it to children's charities. After a year-long absence from the screen, Winslet starred as a headstrong journalist interviewing a professor on death row in the thriller "The Life of David Gale" (2003). She agreed to the project to work with the director Alan Parker, whom she admired, and believed that the film raised pertinent questions about capital punishment. Mick LaSelle thought that the film had muddled the subject and disliked both the film and Winslet's performance.

To avoid typecasting in historical dramas, Winslet sought out films set in contemporary times. She found it in the science fiction romance "Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind" (2004), in which she played the neurotic and impetuous Clementine, a woman who decides to erase memories of her ex-boyfriend (played by Jim Carrey). Unlike her previous assignments, the role allowed her to display the quirky side to her personality. Gondry encouraged Carrey and Winslet to improvise on set, and to keep herself agile she practised kickboxing. "Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind" proved to be a modest financial success and several critics regarded it as one of the best films of the 21st century. Peter Travers of "Rolling Stone" considered it to be a "uniquely funny, unpredictably tender and unapologetically twisted romance" and thought that Winslet was "electrifying and bruisingly vulnerable" in it. A journalist for "Premiere" magazine credited her for abandoning her "corseted English rose persona", and featured it as the 81st greatest film performance of all time. Winslet considers it to be a favourite among her roles, and she received Best Actress nominations at the Oscar and BAFTA award ceremonies. She has said that the film marked a turning point in her career and prompted directors to offer her a wide variety of parts.

Winslet was paid £6 million to star in her next release of the year, the drama "Finding Neverland". It is about the relationship between J. M. Barrie (played by Johnny Depp) and the Llewelyn Davies boys, which inspired Barrie to write Peter Pan; Winslet played the boys' mother, Sylvia. Despite her reluctance to star in another period piece, Winslet agreed to the project after empathising with Sylvia's love for her children. Ella Taylor of "LA Weekly" found Winslet to be "radiant and earthy as ever" and CNN's Paul Clinton thought that she was "exceptional in a delicate and finely tuned performance". She received a second Best Actress nomination at that year's BAFTA Award ceremony. With a box office gross of US$116 million, "Finding Neverland" became her most widely seen film since "Titanic".

In 2005, Winslet took on a guest role in an episode of the British comedy sitcom "Extras", starring Ricky Gervais and Stephen Merchant. She played a satirical version of herself in itan actress, who in an effort to win an Oscar, takes the role of a nun in a Holocaust film. She received a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Guest Actress in a Comedy Series nomination. Within three months of giving birth to her second child, Winslet returned to work on "Romance & Cigarettes", a musical romantic comedy directed by John Turturro, in which she played Tula, a promiscuous and foulmouthed woman. The part required her to sing and dance, and it helped her lose weight gained during her pregnancy. She twisted her ankle while filming one of the dance sequences. Derek Elley of "Variety" wrote that despite her limited screen time, Winslet had "the showiest role and filthiest one-liners". Winslet declined an offer from Woody Allen to star in "Match Point" (2005) to spend more time with her children.

Winslet had four film releases in 2006. She first appeared in "All the King's Men", a political thriller set in 1940s Louisiana, featuring Sean Penn and Jude Law. She played the supporting part of the love interest to Law's character. The film received negative reviews for its lack of political insight and narrative cohesiveness, and failed to recoup its US$55 million investment. Her next release, the drama "Little Children", was better received. Based on the novel of the same name, the film tells the story of Sarah Pierce, an unhappy housewife who has an affair with a married neighbour (played by Patrick Wilson). Winslet was challenged by the role of an uncaring mother, as she did not understand or respect her character's actions. Scenes requiring her to be hostile towards the child actress playing her daughter proved upsetting for her. Having given birth to two children, Winslet was anxious about the sex scenes in which she had to be nude; she took on the challenge to present a positive image for women with imperfect bodies. A. O. Scott of "The New York Times" wrote that Winslet successfully "registers every flicker of Sarah’s pride, self-doubt and desire, inspiring a mixture of recognition, pity and concern". With another Academy Award for Best Actress nomination, Winslet, at 31, became the youngest performer to accrue five Oscar nominations.

After "Little Children", Winslet played a part she found more sympathetic in Nancy Meyers' romantic comedy "The Holiday". She played Iris, a Briton who temporarily exchanges homes with an American (played by Cameron Diaz) during the Christmas holiday season. The film became Winslet's biggest commercial success in nine years, grossing over US$205 million worldwide. The critic Justin Chang thought the film was formulaic yet pleasing, and took note of Winslet's radiance and charm. In her final release of the year, Winslet voiced Rita, a scavenging sewer rat, in the animated film "Flushed Away". Winslet's sole project of 2007 was as the narrator for the English version of the French children's film "The Fox and the Child".

Winslet had two critically acclaimed roles in 2008. After reading Justin Haythe's screenplay for "Revolutionary Road", an adaptation of Richard Yates's debut novel, Winslet recommended the project to her husband at the time, the director Sam Mendes, and her "Titanic" co-star Leonardo DiCaprio. The film traces the tribulations of a young married couple in 1950s suburban America. Winslet was attracted to the idea of playing a woman whose aspirations had not been met, and she read "The Feminine Mystique" to understand the psychology of unhappy housewives from the era. Mendes encouraged DiCaprio and Winslet to spend time together, and she believed that the small set they used helped them to develop their character's strained relationship. Hailing Winslet as "the best English-speaking film actress of her generation", David Edelstein of "New York" magazine wrote that "there isn’t a banal moment in Winslet’s performance—not a gesture, not a word".

To avoid a scheduling conflict with "Revolutionary Road", Winslet turned down an offer to star in "The Reader". After her replacement Nicole Kidman left the project due to her pregnancy, Winslet was signed to it. Directed by Stephen Daldry, "The Reader" is based on Bernhard Schlink's novel "Der Vorleser" and is about Hanna Schmitz, an illiterate Nazi concentration camp guard (Winslet), who has an affair with a teenage boy. Winslet researched the Holocaust and the SS guards. To educate herself on the stigma of illiteracy, she spent time with students at the Literacy Partners, an organisation that teaches adults to read and write. Winslet was unable to sympathise with Schmitz and struggled to play the part honestly without humanising her actions. Despite this, some historians criticised the film for making Schmitz an object of the audience's sympathy and accused the filmmakers of Holocaust revisionism. Todd McCarthy commended her for supplying "a haunting shell to this internally decimated woman", and writing for "The Daily Telegraph", Sukhdev Sandhu considered her to be "absolutely fearless here, not just in her willingness to expose herself physically, but her refusal to expose her character psychologically".

Winslet received significant awards attention for her performances in "Revolutionary Road" and "The Reader". She won a Golden Globe Award for each of these films, and for the latter, she was awarded the Academy Award and BAFTA Award for Best Actress. At age 33, she surpassed her own record as the youngest performer to garner six Oscar nominations. She also became the third actress in history to win two Golden Globe Awards at the same ceremony. Exhausted by the media attention during this period, Winslet took two years off work until she was ready to creatively engage again.

Winslet returned to acting with the five-part HBO miniseries "Mildred Pierce" (2011), an adaptation of James M. Cain's novel from the director Todd Haynes. It is about the titular heroine (Winslet), a divorcée during the Great Depression struggling to establish a restaurant business while yearning for the respect of her narcissistic daughter (played by Evan Rachel Wood). Winslet, who had recently divorced Mendes, believed that certain aspects of her character's life mirrored her own. She was intimidated by the scope of the production, as she featured in every scene of the 280-page script. She was disturbed and upset by the story, and was particularly fascinated by the complex relationship between the mother-daughter pair. She collaborated closely with the production and costume designers, and learnt to bake pies and prepare chickens. The broadcast received a limited audience but gained positive reviews. Matt Zoller Seitz of Salon called the series a "quiet, heartbreaking masterpiece" and described Winslet's performance as "terrific—intelligent, focused and seemingly devoid of ego". She received the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actress, in addition to Golden Globe and SAG Award wins.

The ensemble thriller "Contagion" from Steven Soderbergh was Winslet's first film release of 2011. She was cast as a disease detective for the CDC, and she modelled her role on Anne Schuchat, the director of the NCIRD. "Contagion" was a commercial success, and David Denby of "The New Yorker" praised Winslet for capturing the essence of an exasperated woman. Her next project was the Roman Polanski-directed "Carnage", adapted from the play "God of Carnage" by Yasmina Reza. Set entirely inside an apartment, the black comedy follows two sets of parents feuding over their respective children. Jodie Foster, John C. Reilly, and Christoph Waltz co-starred. The cast rehearsed the script like a play for two weeks, and Winslet brought her children with her to Paris for the eight weeks of filming. Critics found the adaptation to be less compelling than the play, but praised Foster and Winslet's work. They both received Golden Globe nominations for it.

Winslet said that her workload of 2011 helped her get over heartbreak from her divorce, and after finishing work on "Carnage" she took a break from acting to focus on her children. A short part that she had filmed four years earlier for the anthology film "Movie 43" was her sole screen appearance of 2012. The production received the worst reviews of her career. Winslet also performed an audiobook recording of Émile Zola's novel "Thérèse Raquin".

Winslet was reluctant to accept Jason Reitman's offer to star in his 2013 film adaptation of Joyce Maynard's novel "Labor Day", but agreed after Reitman postponed the production for a year to accommodate Winslet's commitment to her children. Set over a Labor Day weekend, it tells the story of Adele (Winslet), an agoraphobic single mother, who falls in love with an escaped convict. Describing Adele's character as having "more vulnerability than strength", Winslet found her to be a departure from the strong-willed women she typically played. A scene in the film required her to make a pie, for which she drew on her baking experience from "Mildred Pierce". Critical reception for the film was negative; Chris Nashawaty of "Entertainment Weekly" criticised it as "mawkish and melodramatic" but commended Winslet for adding layers to her passive role. Winslet earned her tenth Golden Globe nomination for it.

The novelty of playing a villainous part drew Winslet to Jeanine Matthews in the science fiction film "Divergent" (2014). Set in a dystopian future, the adaptation of Veronica Roth's young adult novel stars Shailene Woodley as a heroine fighting an oppressive regime headed by Winslet's character. Winslet was pregnant with her third child while filming, and her tight-fitting costumes had to be altered to accommodate the pregnancy. To maintain her character's intimidating persona, Winslet remained aloof from her co-stars for much of the filming. Richard Lawson of "Vanity Fair" compared the film unfavourably to the "Hunger Games" film series, and thought that Winslet was underutilised in it. The film earned US$288 million worldwide. "A Little Chaos" marked Winslet's return to the period film genre. Directed by Alan Rickman, it is about a rivalry among gardeners commissioned to create a fountain at the Palace of Versailles. Winslet's role was that of the fictitious architect Sabine de Barra, someone she believed had overcome extreme grief and hardship like herself. Catherine Shoard of "The Guardian" took note of the "emotional honesty" Winslet brought to her part, but criticised the implausibility of her role. Also that year, she read audiobooks of Roald Dahl's children's novels "Matilda" and "The Magic Finger".

In 2015, Winslet reprised the role of Jeanine Matthews in the second instalment of the "Divergent" series, subtitled "", which despite negative reviews earned US$297 million worldwide. Her next film, an adaptation of the Australian gothic novel "The Dressmaker", was described by the director Jocelyn Moorhouse as being reminiscent of the western "Unforgiven" (1992). Winslet starred as the femme fatale Tilly Dunnage, a seamstress who returns to her hometown years after she was accused of murder. She learned to sew for the part and designed some of her own costumes. The production was filmed in the Australian desert and Winslet found it difficult to wear couture dresses in the harsh weather. Despite disliking the film, Robert Abele of "Los Angeles Times" commended Winslet for underplaying her over-the-top part. The film emerged as one of the highest-grossing Australian films of all time, but earned little elsewhere. Winslet won an AACTA Award for Best Actress.

While filming "The Dressmaker", Winslet became aware of an upcoming biopic of Steve Jobs by Aaron Sorkin and directed by Danny Boyle. Keen to play Jobs' marketing chief and confidant Joanna Hoffman, she sent a picture of herself dressed as Hoffman to the film's producer. "Steve Jobs", starring Michael Fassbender in the title role, is told in three acts, each depicting a key milestone in Jobs' career. In preparation, Winslet spent time with Hoffman, and worked with a dialect coach to adopt Hoffman's accent, a mixture of Armenian and Polish, which she considered to be the hardest one of her career. The cast rehearsed each act like a play and filmed it in sequence. Winslet collaborated closely with Fassbender, and their off-screen relationship mirrored the collegial dynamic between Jobs and Hoffman. The film received some of the best reviews of Winslet's career but was a box office flop. Peter Howell of the "Toronto Star" commended her for finding "strength and grace" in her part, and Gregory Ellwood of HitFix thought that she had improved on Hoffman's characterisation. She won the Golden Globe and BAFTA Awards for Best Supporting Actress, and received her seventh Oscar nomination for it.

John Hillcoat's ensemble crime-thriller "Triple 9" (2016) featured Winslet as Irina Vlaslov, a ruthless Russian-Israeli gangster. The critic Ann Hornaday of "The Washington Post" felt that Winslet had failed to effectively portray her. Her next release of the year, "Collateral Beauty", about a man (played by Will Smith) struggling with the death of his daughter, was panned by critics. Writing for "New York" magazine, Emily Yoshida criticised it as a vacuous remake of "A Christmas Carol" and wrote that Winslet had "never looked more painted and tired". It was a modest earner at the box office.

Winslet agreed to the romantic disaster film "The Mountain Between Us" (2017) to take on the challenge of a role requiring physical exertion. It featured Idris Elba and her as two strangers who crash land on an icy, isolated mountain range. They filmed in the mountains of Western Canada at 10,000 feet above sea level where the temperature was well below freezing. Winslet performed her own stunts and described it as the most physically gruelling experience of her career. "The Atlantic"s Megan Garber praised the chemistry between Elba and Winslet, and Moira Macdonald of "The Seattle Times" thought that their charisma had enhanced a mediocre picture. Woody Allen's "Wonder Wheel", a drama set in 1950s Coney Island, was Winslet's next release. She played Ginny, a temperamental housewife having an affair with a lifeguard (Justin Timberlake). She described Ginny as permanently dissatisfied and uneasy, and playing her proved difficult for Winslet, who suffered from anxiety. Manohla Dargis of "The New York Times" disliked Allen's writing but credited Winslet for filling her "shabby character with feverish life". When asked about her decision to work with Allen despite an allegation of sex abuse against him, Winslet chose not to comment on Allen's personal life but said that she was pleased with the collaboration. Several journalists criticised her decision.

"Avatar 2", a science fiction sequel to James Cameron's 2009 film, which required Winslet to work with motion capture technology, will be released in 2020. Winslet has also committed to play the model and photographer Lee Miller in an upcoming biopic, and will voice an animated television series about the Moomins.

Winslet supports several charities and causes. An orange top she wore in "Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind" was auctioned in 2004 for a fund-raising event at Helen & Douglas House, a hospice in Oxford. In 2006, she became a patron of a Gloucester-based charity, the Family Haven, which provides counselling services to vulnerable families. The same year, hand-made envelopes designed by Winslet were auctioned for the "Pushing the Envelope" campaign created by the National Literacy Trust. Winslet was one of the celebrities to participate in a 2007 auction to raise funds for the Afghanistan Relief Organization. In 2009, she contributed to the Butterfly Book, a compilation of doodles made by several celebrities, to raise money for leukaemia research.

In 2009, Winslet narrated the English version of an Icelandic documentary named "A Mother's Courage: Talking Back to Autism", about Margret Ericsdottir, whose child Keli Thorsteinsson suffers from non-verbal autism. Inspired by the story, she teamed with Ericsdottir in 2010 to form an NGO named the Golden Hat Foundation. The organisation aims to create autism awareness and was named after a poem written by Thorsteinsson. As the brand ambassador of the luxury brands Lancôme and Longines, Winslet partnered with these companies to raise awareness and funds for the foundation. She created a make-up collection for Lancôme in 2011 and, in 2017, she designed a new watch for Longines.

In 2012, Winslet wrote a book about autism, entitled "The Golden Hat: Talking Back to Autism", which was published by Simon & Schuster. It contains correspondence between Winslet and Ericsdottir, personal statements from various celebrities, and contributions from Thorsteinsson. A reviewer for "Publishers Weekly" praised the book for its "warmth and sincerity". The United Nations featured the book during a ceremony on the World Autism Awareness Day of 2012. For her work with the Golden Hat Foundation, Winslet received Spain's Yo Dona award for Best Humanitarian Work.

Winslet narrated a video for PETA in 2010 that showed animal cruelty in the production of foie gras. She encouraged chefs to remove the item from their menu and urged consumers to boycott it. In 2015, Winslet lent her support to the UNICEF campaign World’s Largest Lesson, which creates awareness among children about sustainable development and global citizenship. Teased as a child for her weight, Winslet takes a stand against body-shaming and bullying. She narrated an Australian animated short film named "Daisy Chain" (2015), about a victim of cyber-bullying. In 2017, Winslet teamed with Leonardo DiCaprio's environmental foundation for a fundraiser on global warming. Also that year, DiCaprio and Winslet auctioned off a private dinner with themselves to raise money for a British woman's cancer treatment.

While filming "Dark Season", Winslet, aged 15, began a romantic relationship with the actor-writer Stephen Tredre, who was 12 years her senior. She considered him to be a major influence in her life and cohabited with him in London. The couple separated in 1995, but they remained close until he died of bone cancer two years later. Winslet missed the premiere of "Titanic" to attend his funeral. In a 2008 interview, she said that she had never got over his death. 

A year after Tredre's death, Winslet met Jim Threapleton on the set of "Hideous Kinky", in which he was an assistant director. They married in November 1998 at her primary school in Reading, and she gave birth to their daughter, Mia, in 2000. Describing her marriage to Threapleton as a "mess", she later said that she had lost control of her instincts during this period. They divorced in 2001. Soon after her separation from Threapleton, Winslet met the director Sam Mendes when he offered her a part in a play. She refused the offer but began dating him. Disillusioned by the way the British tabloids portrayed her personal life, Winslet moved to New York. She wed Mendes in May 2003 on the island of Anguilla. Their son, Joe, was born later that year. The family divided their time in New York with frequent visits to their estate in the Cotswolds in England. Amid intense media speculation of an affair between Mendes and the actress Rebecca Hall, the couple announced their separation in 2010 and were divorced a year later. Winslet admitted to being heartbroken by the split, but affirmed her determination to look after her children in spite of her marital breakups.

While holidaying at Richard Branson's estate on Necker Island in 2011, Winslet met her third husband, Ned RocknRoll (born Edward Abel Smith; he is the nephew of Branson and works for Virgin Galactic), during a house fire. The couple married in New York in December 2012, and their son, Bear Blaze Winslet, was born the next year. After moving back to England, Winslet purchased a property worth £3.25 million by the sea in West Wittering, Sussex, where (as of 2015) she lives with RocknRoll and her children. In a 2015 interview, she described how much she enjoyed living in the countryside.

Winslet has said that despite her three marriages and a family structure that might be perceived as "unconventional" by some, she does not consider it to be any "less of a family". She refuses jobs that take her away from her children for long, and likes to schedule her film commitments to coincide with their school holidays. Discussing her parenting style, Winslet remarked that she enjoys packing lunches and doing the school run.

Several journalists consider Winslet to be among the best actresses of her generation. Despite achieving stardom early in her career with the top-grossing "Titanic", Winslet has rarely acted in commerce-driven pictures. A journalist for "Elle" believes that her choices reflect the "soul and attitude of a jobbing actress, trapped in the body of a movie star". Tom Perrotta, the author of "Little Children", has said that Winslet "gravitates toward troubling roles in smaller films", typically those of "thorny, potentially unsympathetic" women. The journalist Mark Harris writes that she specialises in "unsentimentalized, restless, troubled, discontented, disconcerted, difficult women" and John Hiscock of "The Daily Telegraph" has identified a theme of characters who are free-spirited with a sexual edge to them. Stephen Whitty of NJ.com associates Winslet with "serious, almost despairing material", although he finds it hard to pigeonhole her as an actress.

Leonardo DiCaprio, who starred with Winslet in "Titanic" and "Revolutionary Road", considers her to be "the most prepared and well-researched actor on set", and Jude Law, her co-star in "The Holiday", believes that despite her seriousness she remains "very calm and good-natured". Her "Steve Jobs" director Danny Boyle has identified a willingness in Winslet to avoid typecasting and has said that she takes an effort "to reposition directors’ and producers’ perspective on her" to allow herself to be challenged as an artist.

Winslet has said that she is interested in parts of "angst-ridden women" with strong dispositions masking flaws and insecurities. She connects with "women who are either finding their way out of a situation, looking for love, having some struggle within love, or questioning the big things in life". Drawn to parts that are in tandem with her personal struggles at certain points in her life, she finds it difficult to detach herself from her roles, saying that "you have to confront your true feelings every single day. And that’s pretty exhausting. Then you have to go home and make dinner". Even so, she finds it therapeutic to perform. Winslet is known for her willingness to perform nude scenes, having done so in 12 of her films, although she considers its contribution to the narrative before agreeing to it. She believes that these scenes promote a positive body image among women.

In a 2015 article for "Elle", Sally Holmes described Winslet's ability to establish rapport with her manner. Jo Ellison of "Vogue" writes that she has an "authoritative, almost ambassadorial aura", and Kira Cochrane of "The Guardian" considers her to be "articulate, sophisticated, [with] a definite hint of grandeur". Describing Winslet as plain-spoken, Krista Smith of "Vanity Fair" believes that despite her stardom she is unpretentious.

Winslet's weight fluctuations over the years have been well documented by the media. She has been outspoken about her refusal to allow Hollywood to dictate her weight. In 2003, the British edition of "GQ" magazine published photographs of Winslet that had been digitally altered to make her look taller and thinner. Winslet stated that the alterations were made without her consent. "GQ" subsequently issued an apology. In 2007, she won a defamation case against "Grazia" magazine after it claimed that she had visited a dietitian. She claimed £10,000 in damages, and donated the amount to an eating disorder charity. She won another case in 2009 against the British tabloid "Daily Mail" after it claimed she had lied about her exercise regimen. She received an apology and a payout of £25,000.

Winslet was named one of the most beautiful people in the world by "People" magazine in 2005. Her beauty and sex appeal have been picked up by several other publications, including "Harper's Bazaar", "Who", and "Empire" magazines. She has said that she does not subscribe to the beauty ideal of Hollywood, and uses her celebrity to empower women to accept their appearance with pride. She has spoken against Botox and plastic surgery. In an effort to encourage natural ageing, she formed the British Anti-Cosmetic Surgery League, alongside the actresses Emma Thompson and Rachel Weisz. She instructs magazines and brands not to digitally smooth her wrinkles in photographs. Winslet is reluctant to discuss the gender pay gap in Hollywood as she dislikes talking about her salary in public. In 2009, "Forbes" reported her annual salary to be US$2 million, a majority of that stemming from her endorsement deals. Also that year, the UK Film Council calculated that she had earned £20 million from her acting roles since 1995.

"Time" magazine named Winslet one of the 100 most influential people in the world in 2009. Madame Tussauds in London unveiled a wax statue of Winslet in 2011. The following year, she received an Honorary César award, and in 2014, she received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame. Winslet was appointed Commander of the Order of the British Empire (CBE) in the 2012 Birthday Honours for her services to drama.

Prolific in film since 1994, Winslet's most acclaimed and highest-grossing films, according to the online portal Box Office Mojo and the review aggregate site Rotten Tomatoes, include "Heavenly Creatures" (1994), "Sense and Sensibility" (1995), "Hamlet" (1996), "Titanic" (1997), "Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind" (2004), "The Holiday" (2006), "Divergent" (2014), "" (2015), and "Steve Jobs" (2015). Her television projects include the miniseries "Mildred Pierce" (2011).

Winslet has been recognised by the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences for the following performances:


Winslet has won three BAFTA Awards: Best Actress for "The Reader" (2008); and Best Supporting Actress for "Sense and Sensibility" (1995) and "Steve Jobs" (2016). She has also won the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Miniseries for "Mildred Pierce" (2011), and the Grammy Award for Best Spoken Word Album for Children for narrating the children's audiobook "Listen to the Storyteller" (1999). She is among the few actresses to win three of the four major American entertainment awards (EGOT).




</doc>
<doc id="240361" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=240361" title="Sally Field">
Sally Field

Sally Margaret Field (born November 6, 1946) is an American actress and director. Field began her career on television, starring on the sitcoms "Gidget" (1965–66), "The Flying Nun" (1967–70), and "The Girl with Something Extra" (1973–74). She ventured into film with "Smokey and the Bandit" (1977) and later "Norma Rae" (1979), for which she received the Academy Award for Best Actress. She later received Golden Globe Award nominations for her performances in "Absence of Malice" (1981) and "Kiss Me Goodbye" (1982), before receiving her second Academy Award for Best Actress for "Places in the Heart" (1984). Field received further nominations for the Golden Globe Award for Best Actress for "Murphy's Romance" (1985) and "Steel Magnolias" (1989).

In the 1990s, Field appeared in a wide range of films, including "Not Without My Daughter" (1991) and "Mrs. Doubtfire" (1993) before being nominated for the BAFTA Award for Best Actress in a Supporting Role for her performance as Mrs. Gump in "Forrest Gump" (1994). In the 2000s, she returned to television with a recurring role on the NBC medical drama "ER", for which she won the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Guest Actress in a Drama Series in 2001. From 2006 to 2011, she portrayed the lead role of Nora Walker on the ABC television drama "Brothers & Sisters", for which she received the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Drama Series in 2007. Field later starred as Mary Todd Lincoln in "Lincoln" (2012), for which she was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress and the Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actress, among other accolades. She also appeared as Aunt May in "The Amazing Spider-Man" (2012) and reprised the role in the 2014 sequel. In 2015, she portrayed the titular character in "Hello, My Name Is Doris", for which she was nominated for the Critics' Choice Movie Award for Best Actress in a Comedy.

As a director, Field is known for the television film "The Christmas Tree" (1996), an episode of the 1998 HBO miniseries "From the Earth to the Moon" as well as the feature film "Beautiful" (2000). In 2014, she was presented with a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame.

Sally Field was born in Pasadena, California, to Margaret Field (née Morlan; an actress) and Richard Dryden Field. Her father was an army officer. Following her parents' 1950 divorce, her mother married actor and stuntman Jock Mahoney. Through her maternal grandmother's genealogical line, Field is a descendant of a Mayflower passenger and colonial governor William Bradford, her 10 times great-grandfather.

As a teen, Field attended Portola Middle School and Birmingham High School in Van Nuys, where she was a cheerleader. Her classmates included financier Michael Milken, actress Cindy Williams, and talent agent Michael Ovitz.

Field got her start on television as the boy-crazy surfer girl in the sitcom "Gidget" (1965–66). The show was not an initial success and was canceled after a single season; however, summer reruns garnered respectable ratings, making the show a belated success. Wanting to find a new starring vehicle for Field, ABC next produced "The Flying Nun" with Field cast as Sister Bertrille for three seasons, from 1967 to 1970. In an interview included on the Season One DVD release, Field said that she thoroughly enjoyed "Gidget", but hated "The Flying Nun" because she was not treated with respect by the show's directors. Field was then typecast, finding respectable roles difficult to come by. In 1971, Field starred in the ABC TV movie "Maybe I'll Come Home in the Spring", playing a discouraged teen runaway who returns home with a bearded, drug-abusing hippie (played by David Carradine). She made several guest television appearances through the mid 1970s, including a role on the western "Alias Smith and Jones", a popular TV series starring "Gidget" co-star Pete Duel. She also appeared in the episode "Whisper" on the TV thriller "Night Gallery".

In 1973, Field was cast in a starring role opposite John Davidson in the short-lived series "The Girl with Something Extra" from 1973 to 1974. Following the series' cancellation, Field studied at the Actors Studio with the acting teacher Lee Strasberg. Strasberg became a mentor to the actress, helping her to move past her television image of the girl next door. It was during this time period that Field divorced her first husband in 1975.

Soon after studying with Strasberg, Field landed the title role in the 1976 TV film "Sybil", based on the book by Flora Rheta Schreiber. Her dramatic portrayal of a young woman afflicted with multiple personality disorder earned her a best dramatic actress Emmy Award in 1977 and enabled her to break through the typecasting of her sitcom work.

In 1977 she co-starred with Burt Reynolds, Jackie Gleason, and Jerry Reed in the year's #2 highest-grossing film, "Smokey and the Bandit".

In 1979 Field played the eponymous union organizer in "Norma Rae", a successful film that established her as a dramatic actress. Vincent Canby, reviewing the film for "The New York Times", wrote: ""Norma Rae" is a seriously concerned contemporary drama, illuminated by some very good performances and one, Miss Field's, that is spectacular." For her role in "Norma Rae", Field won the Best Female Performance Prize at the Cannes Film Festival and the Academy Award for Best Actress.

Field appeared with Reynolds in three more films: "The End", "Hooper" and "Smokey and the Bandit II". In 1981, she continued to change her image, playing a foul-mouthed prostitute opposite Tommy Lee Jones in the South-set film "Back Roads". She received Golden Globe nominations for the 1981 drama "Absence of Malice" and the 1982 comedy "Kiss Me Goodbye".

Then came a second Oscar for her starring role in the 1984 drama "Places in the Heart". Field's gushing acceptance speech is well remembered and has since been both admired as earnest and parodied as excessive. She said, "I haven't had an orthodox career, and I've wanted more than anything to have your respect. The first time I didn't feel it, but this time I feel it—and I can't deny the fact that you like me, right now, you like me!" Field was actually making a humorous reference to dialog from her role in "Norma Rae", but many people missed the connection. Field even parodied herself when she delivered the line (often misquoted as "You like me, you "really" like me!") in a Charles Schwab commercial.

In 1985, she costarred with James Garner in the romantic comedy "Murphy's Romance". In A&E's biography of Garner, she cited her on-screen kiss with Garner as the best cinematic kiss she ever had. The following year, Field appeared on the cover of the March 1986 issue of "Playboy" magazine, in which she was the interview subject. She did not appear as a pictorial subject in the magazine, although she did wear the classic leotard and bunny-ears outfit on the cover. That year, she received the Women in Film Crystal Award. For her role as matriarch M'Lynn in the film version of "Steel Magnolias" (1989), she was nominated for a 1990 Golden Globe Award for Best Actress.

Field had supporting roles in a number of other movies, including "Mrs. Doubtfire" (1993) in which she played Miranda Hillard, the wife of Robin Williams's character and the love interest of Pierce Brosnan's character Stuart 'Stu' Dunmyer. She then played Tom Hanks's mother in "Forrest Gump" (1994), even though she was only 10 years older than Hanks, with whom she had co-starred six years earlier in "Punchline".

Field's other 1990s films included "Not Without My Daughter", a controversial thriller based on the real-life experience of Betty Mahmoody's escape from Iran with her daughter Mahtob; and "Soapdish", a comedy in which she played pampered soap-opera star Celeste Talbert and was joined by an all-star cast including Kevin Kline, Whoopi Goldberg, Elisabeth Shue and Robert Downey, Jr. In 1996 Field received the Berlinale Camera award at the 46th Berlin International Film Festival for her role as a grieving vigilante mother in director John Schlesinger's film "Eye for an Eye". She co-starred with Natalie Portman in "Where the Heart Is" (2000) and appeared opposite Reese Witherspoon in "".

Field had a recurring role on "ER" in the 2000–01 season as Dr. Abby Lockhart's mother, Maggie, who suffers from bipolar disorder, a role for which she won an Emmy Award in 2001. After her critically acclaimed stint on the show, she returned to the role in 2003 and 2006. She also starred in the very short-lived 2002 series "The Court".

Field's directorial career began with the television film "The Christmas Tree" (1996). In 1998 she directed the episode "The Original Wives' Club" of the critically acclaimed TV mini-series "From the Earth to the Moon", also playing a minor role as Trudy, the wife of astronaut Gordon Cooper. In 2000, she directed the feature film "Beautiful".

Field was a late addition to the ABC drama "Brothers & Sisters", which debuted in September 2006. In the show's pilot, the role of matriarch Nora Walker was played by Betty Buckley. However, the show's producers decided to take the character in another direction, and offered the part to Field, who won the 2007 Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Drama Series for her performance. The drama also starred Calista Flockhart and Rachel Griffiths as Nora's adult daughters. In November 2009, Field appeared on an episode of "The Doctors" to talk about osteoporosis and her Rally With Sally Foundation.

She portrayed Aunt May in the Marvel Comics films "The Amazing Spider-Man" (2012) as well as the 2014 sequel. Field's widely praised portrayal of Mary Todd Lincoln in Steven Spielberg's film "Lincoln" brought her Best Supporting Actress Award nominations at the Oscars, Golden Globes, BAFTA and Screen Actors Guild.

On May 5, 2014, Field received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame for her contributions to motion pictures. Her star is located in front of the Hollywood Wax Museum. In January 2015, it was announced that she would co-host TCM. The same year, Field portrayed the titular character in "Hello, My Name Is Doris", for which she was nominated for the Critics' Choice Movie Award for Best Actress in a Comedy.

In 2017, Field reprised her role as Amanda Wingfield in "The Glass Menagerie" on Broadway at the Belasco Theatre. Performances began on February 7, 2017, in previews, and officially opened on March 9. The production closed on May 21, 2017. Field had previously played the role in the Kennedy Center production in 2004. She was nominated for a Tony Award for Best Actress in a Play for her performance.

Field was married to Steven Craig from 1968 to 1975. During their marriage, the couple had two sons: Peter Craig (born 1969), a novelist, and Eli Craig (born 1972), an actor and director.

In the late 1970s, Field had a relationship with Burt Reynolds, during which time they co-starred in several films, including "Smokey and the Bandit", "Smokey and the Bandit II", "The End" and "Hooper".

After the end of her relationship with Reynolds, Field married second husband Alan Greisman in 1984. Together they had one son, Sam, in 1987. Field and Greisman divorced in 1993.

In 2005 Field was diagnosed with osteoporosis. Her diagnosis led her to create the "Rally with Sally for Bone Health" campaign with support from Roche and GlaxoSmithKline that controversially co-promoted Boniva, a bisphosphonate treatment for osteoporosis. Field's campaign encouraged the early diagnosis of such conditions through technology such as bone-density scans.

During the 2007 Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Drama Series, Field's acceptance speech contained an antiwar sentiment: "If the mothers ruled the world, there would be no goddamn wars in the first place." Fox Broadcasting Company, which aired the Emmys, cut the sound and picture after the word "god" and did not cut back to the stage after Field finished talking. An e-mail statement from the company the day after the incident explained that the censorship of Field's speech (among two other censorship incidents during the award ceremony) occurred because "some language during the live broadcast may have been considered inappropriate by some viewers. As a result, Fox's broadcast standards executives determined it appropriate to drop sound and picture during those portions of the show."

Field is an advocate for women's rights. She has served on the board of directors of Vital Voices Global Partnership, an international women's NGO, and has co-hosted the Global Leadership Awards six times. A Democrat, Field supported Hillary Clinton's bid for the Democratic Party nomination in the 2008 presidential election.

Field is also an advocate for gay rights and won the Human Rights Campaign's Ally for Equality Award in 2012. Her youngest son, Sam, is openly gay.



Sources: Emmy Awards; Golden Globe Awards



</doc>
<doc id="230698" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=230698" title="Helen Mirren">
Helen Mirren

Dame Helen Lydia Mirren, (; born 26 July 1945) is an English actor. Mirren began her acting career with the Royal Shakespeare Company in 1967, and is one of the few performers who have achieved the Triple Crown of Acting. She won the Academy Award for Best Actress in 2007 for her performance as Queen Elizabeth II in "The Queen" and received the Olivier Award for Best Actress and Tony Award for Best Actress in a Play for the same role in "The Audience". 

Mirren's other Academy Award nominations include "The Madness of King George" (1994), "Gosford Park" (2001) and "The Last Station" (2009). For her role as police detective Jane Tennison on the British television series "Prime Suspect", which ran from 1991 to 2006, she won three consecutive BAFTA Awards for Best Actress between 1992 and 1994 and three Emmy Awards. She also received another Emmy Award and a Golden Globe Award for her performance in the miniseries "Elizabeth I" (2005).

Some of her other notable film roles include Marcella in the 1984 film "Cal", for which she won the Cannes Film Festival Award for Best Actress, "2010" (1984), "The Cook, the Thief, His Wife & Her Lover" (1989), "Teaching Mrs. Tingle" (1999), "Calendar Girls" (2003), "Hitchcock" (2012), "The Hundred-Foot Journey" (2014), "Woman in Gold" (2015), "Trumbo" (2015), and "The Leisure Seeker" (2017). She played Victoria Winslow in the action-comedy films "Red" (2010) and "Red 2" (2013).

In 2003, she was appointed a Dame Commander of the Order of the British Empire (DBE) for services to drama. In 2013, Mirren was awarded a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame, and in 2014, BAFTA announced that Mirren would be the recipient of the Academy Fellowship.

She was born Helen Lydia Mironoff at Queen Charlotte's and Chelsea Hospital in Hammersmith, west London, the daughter of Kathleen "Kitty" Alexandrina Eva Matilda (; 1909–1996) and Vasily Petrovich Mironoff (1913–1980). Her mother was English and her father was Russian, originally from Kuryanovo, Smolensk Oblast. Mirren's paternal grandfather, Colonel Pyotr Vasilievich Mironov, was in the Imperial Russian Army and fought in the 1904 Russo-Japanese War. He later became a diplomat, and was negotiating an arms deal in Britain when his family and he were stranded during the Russian Revolution. The former diplomat became a London cab driver to support his family and settled down in England.

His son, Helen's father, anglicised the family name to Mirren in the 1950s and changed his name to Basil Mirren. He played the viola with the London Philharmonic before World War II, and later drove a taxi cab and was a driving-test examiner, before becoming a civil servant with the Ministry of Transport. Mirren's mother was a working-class Londoner from West Ham, East London, and was the 13th of 14 children born to a butcher whose own father had been the butcher to Queen Victoria. Mirren considers her upbringing to have been "very anti-monarchist". Mirren was the second of three children; she was born three years after her older sister, Katherine ("Kate"; born 1942), and also had a younger brother, Peter Basil (1948–2002). Mirren was brought up in Leigh-on-Sea, Essex.

Mirren attended Hamlet Court primary school Westcliff-on-Sea, where she had the lead role in a school production of "Hansel and Gretel" and St Bernard's High School for Girls in Southend-on-Sea, where she also acted in school productions. She then attended a teaching college, the New College of Speech and Drama in London, "housed within Anna Pavlova's old home, Ivy House" on the North End Road – which runs from Golders Green to Hampstead. Aged eighteen, she auditioned for the National Youth Theatre (NYT) and was accepted. By the time she was 20, she was playing Cleopatra in the NYT production of "Antony and Cleopatra" at the Old Vic, which led to her signing with the agent Al Parker.

As a result of her work for the National Youth Theatre, Mirren was invited to join the Royal Shakespeare Company (RSC). While with the RSC, she played Castiza in Trevor Nunn's 1966 staging of "The Revenger's Tragedy", Diana in "All's Well That Ends Well" (1967), Cressida in "Troilus and Cressida" (1968), Rosalind in "As You Like It" (1968), Julia in "The Two Gentlemen of Verona" (1970), Tatiana in Gorky's "Enemies" at the Aldwych (1971), and the title role in "Miss Julie" at The Other Place (1971). She also appeared in four productions, directed by Braham Murray for Century Theatre at the University Theatre in Manchester, between 1965 and 1967.

In 1970, the director/producer John Goldschmidt made a documentary film, "Doing Her Own Thing", about Mirren during her time with the Royal Shakespeare Company. The film was made for ATV and shown on the ITV Network in the UK. In 1972 and 1973, Mirren worked with Peter Brook's International Centre for Theatre Research, and joined the group's tour in North Africa and the US, during which they created "The Conference of the Birds". She then rejoined the RSC, playing Lady Macbeth at Stratford in 1974 and at the Aldwych Theatre in 1975.

Sally Beauman reported, in her 1982 history of the RSC, that Mirren—while appearing in Nunn's "Macbeth" (1974), and in a highly publicised letter to "The Guardian" newspaper—had sharply criticised both the National Theatre and the RSC for their lavish production expenditure, declaring it "unnecessary and destructive to the art of the Theatre," and adding, "The realms of truth, emotion and imagination reached for in acting a great play have become more and more remote, often totally unreachable across an abyss of costume and technicalities..." According to Beauman, there were no discernible repercussions for this rebuke of the RSC.

At the Royal Court Theatre in September 1975, she played the role of a rock star named Maggie in "Teeth 'n' Smiles", a musical play by David Hare; she reprised the role the following year in a revival of the play at Wyndham's Theatre in May 1976. Her performance earned her the London critics' Plays & Players Best Actress award.

Beginning in November 1975, Mirren played in West End repertory with the Lyric Theatre Company as Nina in "The Seagull" and Ella in Ben Travers' new farce "The Bed Before Yesterday" ("Mirren is stirringly voluptuous as the Harlowesque good-time girl": Michael Billington, "The Guardian", 10 December 1975). At the RSC in Stratford in 1977, and at the Aldwych the following year, she played a steely Queen Margaret in Terry Hands' production of the three parts of "Henry VI", while 1979 saw her 'bursting with grace', and winning acclaim for her performance as Isabella in Peter Gill's production of "Measure for Measure" at Riverside Studios.

In 1981, she returned to the Royal Court for the London premiere of Brian Friel's "Faith Healer". That same year she also won acclaim for her performance in the title role of John Webster's "The Duchess of Malfi", a production of Manchester's Royal Exchange Theatre which was later transferred to The Roundhouse in Chalk Farm, London. Reviewing her portrayal for "The Sunday Telegraph", Francis King wrote: "Miss Mirren never leaves it in doubt that even in her absences, this ardent, beautiful woman is the most important character of the story."

In her performance as Moll Cutpurse in "The Roaring Girl"—at the Royal Shakespeare Theatre in January 1983, and at the Barbican Theatre in April 1983—she was described as having "swaggered through the action with radiant singularity of purpose, filling in areas of light and shade that even Thomas Middleton and Thomas Dekker omitted." – Michael Coveney, "Financial Times", April 1983.

After a relatively barren sojourn in the Hollywood Hills, she returned to England at the beginning of 1989 to co-star with Bob Peck at the Young Vic in the London premiere of the Arthur Miller double-bill, "Two Way Mirror", performances which prompted Miller to remark: "What is so good about English actors is that they are not afraid of the open expression of large emotions" (interview by Sheridan Morley: "The Times" 11 January 1989). In "Elegy for a Lady" she played the svelte proprietress of a classy boutique, while as the blonde hooker in "Some Kind of Love Story" she was "clad in a Freudian slip and shifting easily from waif-like vulnerability to sexual aggression, giving the role a breathy Monroesque quality" (Michael Billington, "The Guardian").

On 15 February 2013, at the West End's Gielgud Theatre she began a turn as Elizabeth II in the World Premiere of Peter Morgan's "The Audience". The show was directed by Stephen Daldry. In April she was named best actress at the Olivier Awards for her role.

A further stage breakthrough came in 1994, in an Yvonne Arnaud Theatre production bound for the West End, when Bill Bryden cast her as Natalya Petrovna in Ivan Turgenev's "A Month in the Country". Her co-stars were John Hurt as her aimless lover Rakitin and Joseph Fiennes in only his second professional stage appearance as the cocksure young tutor Belyaev. "Instead of a bored Natalya fretting the summer away in dull frocks, Mirren, dazzlingly gowned, is a woman almost wilfully allowing her heart's desire for her son's young tutor to rule her head and wreak domestic havoc...Creamy shoulders bared, she feels free to launch into a gloriously enchanted, dreamily comic self-confession of love." (John Thaxter, Richmond & Twickenham Times, 4 March 1994)

Mirren was twice nominated for Broadway's Tony Award as Best Actress (Play): in 1995 for her Broadway debut in "A Month in the Country", now directed by Scott Ellis ("Miss Mirren's performance is bigger and more animated than the one she gave last year in an entirely different London production", Vincent Canby in the NY Times, 26 April 1995). Then again in 2002 for August Strindberg's "Dance of Death", co-starring with Sir Ian McKellen, their fraught rehearsal period coinciding with the terrorist attacks on New York on 11 September 2001 (as recorded in her "In the Frame" autobiography, September 2007).
On 7 June 2015‚ Mirren won the Tony Award for Best Performance by an Actress in a Leading Role in a Play‚ for her portrayal of Queen Elizabeth II in "The Audience" which also won her the Laurence Oliver Award for Best Actress and made her one of the few actors to achieve the “Triple Crown of Acting”, joining the ranks of legends including Ingrid Bergman‚ Dame Maggie Smith, and Al Pacino.

In 1998, Mirren played Cleopatra to Alan Rickman's Antony in "Antony and Cleopatra" at the National Theatre. The production received poor reviews; "The Guardian" called it "plodding spectacle rarely informed by powerful passion", while "The Daily Telegraph" said "the crucial sexual chemistry on which any great production ultimately depends is fatally absent". In 2000 Nicholas Hytner, who had worked with Mirren on the film version of "The Madness of King George", cast her as Lady Torrance in his revival of Tennessee Williams' "Orpheus Descending" at the Donmar Warehouse in London. Michael Billington, reviewing for "The Guardian", described her performance as "an exemplary study of an immigrant woman who has acquired a patina of resilient toughness but who slowly acknowledges her sensuality."

At the National Theatre in November 2003 she again won praise playing Christine Mannon ("defiantly cool, camp and skittish", "Evening Standard"; "glows with mature sexual allure", "Daily Telegraph") in a revival of Eugene O'Neill's "Mourning Becomes Electra" directed by Howard Davies. "This production was one of the best experiences of my professional life, The play was four and a half hours long, and I have never known that kind of response from an audience ... It was the serendipity of a beautifully cast play, with great design and direction, It will be hard to be in anything better." ("In the Frame", September 2007). She played the title role in Jean Racine's "Phèdre" at the National in 2009, in a production directed by Nicholas Hytner. The production was also staged at the Epidaurus amphitheatre on 11 and 12 July 2009.

Mirren has also appeared in a large number of films throughout her career. Some of her earlier film appearances include roles in "Midsummer Night's Dream", "Age of Consent", "O Lucky Man!", "Caligula", "Excalibur", "2010", "The Long Good Friday", "White Nights", "When the Whales Came" and "The Mosquito Coast". She appeared in "Some Mother's Son", "Painted Lady", "The Prince of Egypt" and "The Madness of King George". One of her other film roles was in Peter Greenaway's "The Cook, The Thief, His Wife and Her Lover", as the thief's wife, opposite Michael Gambon. In "Teaching Mrs. Tingle", she plays sadistic history teacher Mrs Eve Tingle. In 2007, she claimed director Michael Winner had treated her "like a piece of meat" at a casting call in 1964. Asked about the incident, Winner told "The Guardian": "I don't remember asking her to turn around but if I did I wasn't being serious. I was only doing what the [casting] agent asked me – and for this I get reviled! Helen's a lovely person, she's a great actress and I'm a huge fan, but her memory of that moment is a little flawed."

Mirren continued her successful film career when she starred more recently in "Gosford Park" with Maggie Smith and "Calendar Girls" with Julie Walters. Other more recent appearances include "The Clearing", "Pride", "Raising Helen", and "Shadowboxer". Mirren also provided the voice for the supercomputer "Deep Thought" in the film adaptation of Douglas Adams' "The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy". During her career, she has portrayed three British queens in different films and television series: Queen Elizabeth I in the television series "Elizabeth I" (2005), Queen Elizabeth II in "The Queen" (2006), and Queen Charlotte, the wife of King George III, in "The Madness of King George" (1994). She is the only actress ever to have portrayed both Queens Elizabeth on the screen.

Mirren's title role of "The Queen" earned her numerous acting awards including a BAFTA, a Golden Globe, and an Academy Award, among many others. During her acceptance speech at the Academy Award ceremony, she praised and thanked Elizabeth II and stated that she had maintained her dignity and weathered many storms during her reign as Queen. Mirren later appeared in supporting roles in the films "", "Inkheart", "State of Play", and "The Last Station", for which she was nominated for an Oscar.

Mirren's first film of the 2000s was Joel Hershman's "Greenfingers" (2000), a comedy based on the true story about the award-winning prisoners of HMP Leyhill, a minimum-security prison. Mirren portrayed a devoted plantswoman in the film, who coaches a team of prison gardeners, led by Clive Owen, to victory at a prestigious flower show. The project garnered largely lukewarm reviews from critics, who felt that it added "nothing new to this already saturated genre" of British feel-good films. The same year, she began work on the mystery film "The Pledge", actor Sean Penn's second directorial effort, in which she played a child psychologist. A critical success, the ensemble film tanked at the box office. Also the year, she filmed the American-Icelandic satirical drama "No Such Thing" opposite Sarah Polley. Directed by Hal Hartley, Mirren portrayed a soulless television producer in the film, who strives for sensationalistic stories. It was largely panned by critics.

Her biggest critical and commercial success, released in 2001, became Robert Altman's all-star ensemble mystery film "Gosford Park". An homage to writer Agatha Christie's whodunit style, the story follows a party of wealthy Britons and an American, and their servants, who gather for a shooting weekend at an English country house, resulting in an unexpected murder. Widely acclaimed by critics, it received multiple awards and nominations, including a second Academy Award nomination and first Screen Actors Guild Award win for Mirren's portrayal of the sternly devoted head servant Mrs. Wilson. Mirren's last film that year was Fred Schepisi's dramedy film "Last Orders" opposite Michael Caine and Bob Hoskins.

In 2003, Mirren starred in Nigel Cole's comedy "Calendar Girls", inspired by the true story of a group of Yorkshire women who produced a nude calendar to raise money for Leukaemia Research under the auspices of the Women's Institutes. Mirren was initially resistant to join the project, at first dismissing it as another middling British picture, but rethought her decision upon learning of the casting of co-star Julie Walters. The film garnered generally positive reactions by film critics, and grossed $96,000,000 worldwide. In addition, the picture earned Satellite, Golden Globe, and European Film Award nominations for Mirren. Her other film that year was the Showtime television film "The Roman Spring of Mrs. Stone" opposite Olivier Martinez, and Anne Bancroft, based on the 1950 novel of the same title by Tennessee Williams.

In 2010, Mirren appeared in five films. In "Love Ranch", directed by her husband Taylor Hackford, she portrayed Sally Conforte, one half of a married couple who opened the first legal brothel in the United States, the Mustang Ranch in Storey County, Nevada, leading to the mysterious circumstances surrounding the assassination of famous Argentinian boxer Ringo Bonavena. The drama film received mostly negative reviews from critics, who called it "disappointingly flaccid," and underperformed at the international box offices. Mirren starred in the principal role of Prospera, the duchess of Milan, in Julie Taymor's "The Tempest". Based on the play of the same name by Shakespeare, Taymor changed the original character's gender to cast Mirren as her lead. While the actress garnered strong reviews for her portrayal, the film itself was largely panned by critics.

Mirren's next film was the comedy film "Arthur", a remake of the 1981 film of the same name, starring Russell Brand in the lead role. "Arthur" received generally negative reviews from critics, who declared it an "irritating, unnecessary remake." In preparation for her role as a retired Israeli Mossad agent in the film "The Debt", Mirren reportedly immersed herself in studies of Hebrew language, Jewish history, and Holocaust writing, including the life of Simon Wiesenthal, while in Israel in 2009 for the filming of some of the movie's scenes. The film is a remake of a 2007 Israeli film of the same name.

In 2012, Mirren played Alfred Hitchcock's wife Alma Reville in the 2012 biopic "Hitchcock", directed by Sacha Gervasi and based on Stephen Rebello's non-fiction book "Alfred Hitchcock and the Making of Psycho". The film centres on the pair's relationship during the making of "Psycho", a controversial horror film that became one of the most acclaimed and influential works in the filmmaker's career. It became a moderate arthouse success and garnered a lukewarm critical response from critics, who felt that it suffered from "tonal inconsistency and a lack of truly insightful retrospection." Mirren was universally praised for her play however, with Roger Ebert noting that the film depended most on her portrayal, which he found to be "warm and effective." Her other film that year was "The Door", a claustrophobic drama film directed by István Szabó, based on the Hungarian novel of the same name. Set at the height of communist rule in 1960s Hungary, the story of the adaptation centres on the abrasive influence that a mysterious housekeeper wields over her employer and successful novelist, played Martina Gedeck. Mirren found the role "difficult to play" and cited doing it as "one of the hardest things [she has] ever done."
The following year, Mirren replaced Bette Midler in David Mamet's biographical television film "Phil Spector" about the American musician. The HBO film focuses on the relationship between Spector and his defense attorney Linda Kenney Baden, played by Mirren, during the first of his two murder trials for the 2003 death of Lana Clarkson in his California mansion. "Spector" received largely mixed to positive reviews from critics, particularly for Mirren and co-star Al Pacino's performances, and was nominated for eleven Primetime Emmy Awards, also winning Mirren a Screen Actors Guild Award at the 20th awards ceremony. The film drew criticism both from Clarkson's family and friends, who charged that the suicide defense was given more merit than it deserved, and from Spector's wife, who argued that Spector was portrayed as a "foul-mouthed megalomaniac" and a "minotaur". Also in 2013, Mirren voiced the character of Dean Abigail Hardscrabble in Pixar's computer-animated comedy film "Monsters University", which grossed $743 million against its estimated budget of $200 million, and reprised her role in the sequel film "Red 2". The action comedy received a mixed reviews from film critics, who called it a "lackadaisical sequel", but became another commercial success, making over $140 million worldwide.

Mirren's only film of 2014 was the comedy-drama "The Hundred-Foot Journey" opposite Indian actor Om Puri. Directed by Lasse Hallström and produced by Steven Spielberg and Oprah Winfrey, the film is based on Richard Morais' 2010 novel with the same name and tells the story of a feud between two adjacent restaurants in a French town. Mirren garnered largely positive reviews for her performance of a snobby restaurateur, a role which she accepted as she was keen to play a French character, reflecting her "pathetic attempt at being a French actress." The film earned her another Golden Globe nomination and became a modest commercial success, grossing $88.9 million worldwide.

In 2015, Mirren reunited with her former assistant Simon Curtis on "Woman in Gold", co-starring Ryan Reynolds. The film was based on the true story of Jewish refugee Maria Altmann, who, together with her young lawyer Randy Schoenberg, fought the Austrian government to be reunited with Gustav Klimt's painting of her aunt, the famous "Portrait of Adele Bloch-Bauer I". The film received mixed reviews from critics, although Mirren and Reynold's performances were widely praised. A commercial success, "Woman in Gold" became one of the highest-grossing specialty films of the year. The same year, Mirren appeared in Gavin Hood's thriller "Eye in the Sky" (2015), in which she played as a military intelligence officer who leads a secret drone mission to capture a terrorist group living in Nairobi, Kenya. Mirren last film that year was Jay Roach's biographical drama "Trumbo", co-starring Bryan Cranston and Diane Lane. The actress played Hedda Hopper, the famous actress and gossip columnist, in the film, which received generally positive reviews from critics and garnered her a 14th Golden Globe nomination. 

Mirren's only film of 2016 was "Collateral Beauty", directed by David Frankel. Co-Starring Will Smith, Keira Knightley, and Kate Winslet, the ensemble drama follows a man who copes with his daughter's death by writing letters to time, death, and love. The film earned largely negative reviews from critics, who called it "well-meaning but fundamentally flawed." In 2017, Mirren narrated "Cries from Syria", a documentary film about the Syrian Civil War, directed by Evgeny Afineevsky. Also that year, she made an uncredited cameo appearance in F. Gary Gray's "The Fate of the Furious", the eighth installment in "The Fast and the Furious" franchise, playing Magdalene, the mother of Owen and Deckard Shaw. Mirren had a larger role in director Paolo Virzì's English-language debut "The Leisure Seeker", based on the 2009 novel of the same name. On set, she was reunited with Donald Sutherland with whom she had not worked again since "" (1990), portraying a terminally ill couple who escape from their retirement home and take one last cross-country adventure in a vintage van. At the 75th awards ceremony, Mirren received her 15th Golden Globe nomination.

In 2018, Mirren portrayed heiress Sarah Winchester in the supernatural horror film "Winchester: The House That Ghosts Built", directed by The Spierig Brothers. She will also play Mother Ginger in Lasse Hallström and Disney's adaptation of "The Nutcracker", titled "The Nutcracker and the Four Realms", and is expected to appear in the ensemble film "Berlin, I Love You" and the French crime thriller film "Anna", the latter directed and written by Luc Besson.

Mirren is known for her role as detective Jane Tennison in the widely viewed "Prime Suspect", a multiple award-winning television drama series that was noted for its high quality and popularity. Her portrayal of Tennison won her three consecutive BAFTA Awards for Best Actress between 1992 and 1994.

Some of Mirren's other television performances include "Cousin Bette" (1971); "As You Like It" (1979); "Blue Remembered Hills" (1979); "The Twilight Zone" episode "Dead Woman's Shoes" (1985); "The Passion of Ayn Rand" (1999), where her performance won her both the Emmy and the Golden Globe; "Door to Door" (2002); and "The Roman Spring of Mrs. Stone" (2003). In 1976, she appeared with Laurence Olivier, Alan Bates and Malcolm McDowell in a production of Harold Pinter's "The Collection" as part of the "Laurence Olivier Presents" series. She also played Queen Elizabeth I in 2005, in the television serial "Elizabeth I", for Channel 4 and HBO, for which she received an Emmy Award. Mirren won another Emmy Award on 16 September 2007 for her role in "Prime Suspect: The Final Act" on PBS in the same category as in 2006. Mirren hosted "Saturday Night Live" on 9 April 2011.

Mirren lived with actor Liam Neeson during the early 1980s. They met while working on "Excalibur" (1981). Interviewed by James Lipton for "Inside the Actors Studio", Neeson said she was instrumental in his getting an agent.

Mirren married American director Taylor Hackford (her partner since 1986) on 31 December 1997, his 53rd birthday. The ceremony took place at the Ardersier Parish Church near Inverness in the Scottish Highlands. The couple had met on the set of "White Nights". It is her first marriage, and his third (he has two children from his previous marriages). Mirren has no children and says she has "no maternal instinct whatsoever."

Mirren's autobiography, "In the Frame: My Life in Words and Pictures", was published in the UK by Weidenfeld and Nicolson in September 2007. Reviewing for "The Stage", John Thaxter wrote: "Sumptuously illustrated, at first sight it looks like another of those photo albums of the stars. But between the pictures there are almost 200 pages of densely printed text, an unusually frank story of her private and professional life, mainly in the theatre, the words clearly Mirren's own, delivered with forthright candour."

In 1990, Mirren stated in an interview that she is an atheist. In the August 2011 issue of "Esquire" magazine, Mirren said, "I am quite spiritual. I believed in fairies when I was a child. I still do sort of believe in the fairies. And the leprechauns. But I don't believe in God."

In a "GQ" interview in 2008, Mirren stated she had been date raped as a student and had often taken cocaine at parties in her 20s, and until the 1980s. She stopped using the drug after reading the (since debunked) tabloid tale that Klaus Barbie made a living from cocaine dealing.

On 11 May 2010, Mirren attended the unveiling of her waxwork at Madame Tussauds London. The figure reportedly cost £150,000 to make and took four months to complete. In 2012, Mirren was among the British cultural icons selected by artist Sir Peter Blake to appear in a new version of his most famous artwork – the Beatles' "Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band" album cover – to celebrate the British cultural figures of his life that he most admires.

In 2013, Mirren was announced as one of several new models for Marks & Spencer's 'Womanism' campaign. Subtitled "Britain's leading ladies", the campaign saw Mirren appear alongside British women from various fields, including pop singer Ellie Goulding, double Olympic gold medal winning boxer Nicola Adams, and writer Monica Ali. Mirren was listed as one of the fifty best-dressed over 50s by "The Guardian" in March 2013.

She is quoted as being a naturist, telling the Radio Times “I’m a naturist at heart. I love being on beaches where everyone is naked. Ugly people, beautiful people, old people, whatever. It’s so unisexual and so liberating.” In 2004, she was named "Naturist of the Year" by British Naturism. She said: “Many thanks to British Naturism for this great honour. I do believe in naturism and am my happiest on a nude beach with people of all ages and races!”




</doc>
<doc id="13717" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13717" title="Halle Berry">
Halle Berry

Halle Maria Berry (born Maria Halle Berry; August 14, 1966) is an American actress. Berry won the 2002 Academy Award for Best Actress for her performance in the romantic drama "Monster's Ball" (2001). , she is the only black woman to have won the award.

Berry was one of the highest-paid actresses in Hollywood during the 2000s and has been involved in the production of several of the films in which she performed. Berry is also a Revlon spokesmodel. Before becoming an actress, she started modeling and entered several beauty contests, finishing as the 1st runner-up in the Miss USA Pageant and coming in 6th place in the Miss World Pageant in 1986. Her breakthrough film role was in the romantic comedy "Boomerang" (1992), alongside Eddie Murphy, which led to roles in films such as the comedy "The Flintstones" (1994), the political comedy-drama "Bulworth" (1998) and the television film "Introducing Dorothy Dandridge" (1999), for which she won the Primetime Emmy Award and Golden Globe Award for Best Actress in a Miniseries or Movie, among many other awards.

In addition to her Academy Award win, Berry garnered high-profile roles in the 2000s, such as Storm in "X-Men" (2000), the action crime thriller "Swordfish" (2001), and the spy film "Die Another Day" (2002), where she played Bond Girl Jinx. She then appeared in the "X-Men" sequels, "X2" (2003) and "" (2006). In the 2010s, she appeared in movies such as the science fiction film "Cloud Atlas" (2012), the crime thriller "The Call" (2013) and "" (2014). Berry was formerly married to baseball player David Justice, and singer-songwriter Eric Benét. She has a daughter by model Gabriel Aubry, and a son by actor Olivier Martinez.

Berry was born Maria Halle Berry; her name was legally changed to Halle Maria Berry at age five. Her parents selected her middle name from Halle's Department Store, which was then a local landmark in her birthplace of Cleveland, Ohio. Her mother, Judith Ann (née Hawkins), who is of English and German ancestry, was a psychiatric nurse. Her father, Jerome Jesse Berry, was an African-American hospital attendant in the psychiatric ward where her mother worked; he later became a bus driver. Berry's maternal grandmother, Nellie Dicken, was born in Sawley, Derbyshire, England, while her maternal grandfather, Earl Ellsworth Hawkins, was born in Ohio. Berry's parents divorced when she was four years old; she and her older sister, Heidi Berry-Henderson, were raised exclusively by their mother.

Berry has said in published reports that she has been estranged from her father since her childhood, noting in 1992, "I haven't heard from him since [he left]. Maybe he's not alive." Her father was very abusive to her mother. Berry has recalled witnessing her mother being beaten daily, kicked down stairs and hit in the head with a wine bottle.

Berry graduated from Bedford High School where she was a cheerleader, honor student, editor of the school newspaper and prom queen. She worked in the children's department at Higbee's Department store. She then studied at Cuyahoga Community College. In the 1980s, she entered several beauty contests, winning Miss Teen All American in 1985 and Miss Ohio USA in 1986. She was the 1986 Miss USA first runner-up to Christy Fichtner of Texas. In the Miss USA 1986 pageant interview competition, she said she hoped to become an entertainer or to have something to do with the media. Her interview was awarded the highest score by the judges. She was the first African-American Miss World entrant in 1986, where she finished sixth and Trinidad and Tobago's Giselle Laronde was crowned Miss World. According to the "Current Biography Yearbook", Berry "...pursued a modeling career in Chicago... Berry's first weeks in New York were less than auspicious: She slept in a homeless shelter and then in a YMCA".

In 1989, Berry moved to New York City to pursue her acting ambitions. During her early time there, she ran out of money and had to live briefly in a homeless shelter.

Later in 1989, her situation improved and she was cast in the role of model Emily Franklin in the short-lived ABC television series "Living Dolls", which was shot in New York and was a spin-off of the hit series "Who's the Boss?". During the taping of "Living Dolls", she lapsed into a coma and was diagnosed with Type 1 diabetes. After the cancellation of "Living Dolls", she moved to Los Angeles. She went on to have a recurring role on the long-running primetime serial "Knots Landing".
Her film debut was in a small role for Spike Lee's "Jungle Fever" (1991), in which she played Vivian, a drug addict. That same year, Berry had her first co-starring role in "Strictly Business". In 1992, Berry portrayed a career woman who falls for the lead character played by Eddie Murphy in the romantic comedy "Boomerang". The following year, she caught the public's attention as a headstrong biracial slave in the TV adaptation of "", based on the book by Alex Haley. Berry was in the live-action "Flintstones" movie playing the part of "Sharon Stone", a sultry secretary who seduced Fred Flintstone.

Berry tackled a more serious role, playing a former drug addict struggling to regain custody of her son in "Losing Isaiah" (1995), starring opposite Jessica Lange. She portrayed Sandra Beecher in "Race the Sun" (1996), which was based on a true story, shot in Australia, and co-starred alongside Kurt Russell in "Executive Decision". Beginning in 1996, she was a Revlon spokeswoman for seven years and renewed her contract in 2004.

She starred alongside Natalie Deselle Reid in the 1997 comedy film "B*A*P*S". In 1998, Berry received praise for her role in "Bulworth" as an intelligent woman raised by activists who gives a politician (Warren Beatty) a new lease on life. The same year, she played the singer Zola Taylor, one of the three wives of pop singer Frankie Lymon, in the biopic "Why Do Fools Fall in Love". In the 1999 HBO biopic "Introducing Dorothy Dandridge", she portrayed the first black woman to be nominated for the Academy Award for Best Actress, and it was to Berry a heart-felt project that she introduced, co-produced and fought intensely for it to come through. Berry's performance was recognized with several awards, including a Primetime Emmy Award and Golden Globe Award.

Berry portrayed the mutant superhero Storm in the film adaptation of the comic book series "X-Men" (2000) and its sequels, "X2" (2003), "" (2006) and "" (2014). In 2001, Berry appeared in the film "Swordfish", which featured her first topless scene. At first, she refused to be filmed topless in a sunbathing scene, but she changed her mind when Warner Brothers raised her fee substantially. The brief flash of her breasts added $500,000 to her fee. Berry considered these stories to be rumors and was quick to deny them. After turning down numerous roles that required nudity, she said she decided to make "Swordfish" because her then-husband, Eric Benét, supported her and encouraged her to take risks.

She appeared as Leticia Musgrove, the troubled wife of an executed murderer (Sean Combs), in the 2001 feature film "Monster's Ball". Her performance was awarded the National Board of Review and the Screen Actors Guild Award for Best Actress; in an interesting coincidence she became the first woman of color to win the Academy Award for Best Actress (earlier in her career, she portrayed Dorothy Dandridge, the first African American to be nominated for Best Actress, and who was born at the same hospital as Berry, in Cleveland, Ohio). The NAACP issued the statement: "Congratulations to Halle Berry and Denzel Washington for giving us hope and making us proud. If this is a sign that Hollywood is finally ready to give opportunity and judge performance based on skill and not on skin color then it is a good thing." This role generated controversy. Her graphic nude love scene with a racist character played by co-star Billy Bob Thornton was the subject of much media chatter and discussion among African Americans. Many in the African-American community were critical of Berry for taking the part. Berry responded: "I don't really see a reason to ever go that far again. That was a unique movie. That scene was special and pivotal and needed to be there, and it would be a really special script that would require something like that again."

Berry asked for a higher fee for Revlon advertisements after winning the Academy Award. Ron Perelman, the cosmetics firm's chief, congratulated her, saying how happy he was that she modeled for his company. She replied, "Of course, you'll have to pay me more." Perelman stalked off in a rage. In accepting her award, she gave an acceptance speech honoring previous black actresses who had never had the opportunity. She said, "This moment is so much bigger than me. This is for every nameless, faceless woman of colour who now has a chance tonight because this door has been opened."

As Bond girl Giacinta 'Jinx' Johnson in the 2002 blockbuster "Die Another Day", Berry recreated a scene from "Dr. No", emerging from the surf to be greeted by James Bond as Ursula Andress had 40 years earlier. Lindy Hemming, costume designer on "Die Another Day", had insisted that Berry wear a bikini and knife as a homage. Berry has said of the scene: "It's splashy", "exciting", "sexy", "provocative" and "it will keep me still out there after winning an Oscar". The bikini scene was shot in Cadiz; the location was reportedly cold and windy, and footage has been released of Berry wrapped in thick towels in between takes to try to stay warm. According to an ITV news poll, Jinx was voted the fourth toughest girl on screen of all time. Berry was hurt during filming when debris from a smoke grenade flew into her eye. It was removed in a 30-minute operation. After Berry won the Academy Award, rewrites were commissioned to give her more screentime for "X2".

She starred in the psychological thriller "Gothika" opposite Robert Downey, Jr. in November 2003, during which she broke her arm in a scene with Downey, who twisted her arm too hard. Production was halted for eight weeks. It was a moderate hit at the United States box office, taking in $60 million; it earned another $80 million abroad. Berry appeared in the nu metal band Limp Bizkit's music video for "Behind Blue Eyes" for the motion picture soundtrack for the film. The same year, she was named #1 in "FHM"s 100 Sexiest Women in the World poll.

Berry received $12.5 million for the title role in the film "Catwoman", a $100 million movie; it grossed $17 million on its first weekend. She was awarded a Worst Actress Razzie Award in 2005 for this role. She appeared at the ceremony to accept the award in person (making her the third person, and second actor, ever to do so) with a sense of humor, considering it an experience of the "rock bottom" in order to be "at the top". Holding the Academy Award in one hand and the Razzie in the other she said, "I never in my life thought that I would be here, winning a Razzie. It's not like I ever aspired to be here, but thank you. When I was a kid, my mother told me that if you could not be a good loser, then there's no way you could be a good winner." The Fund for Animals praised Berry's compassion towards cats and for squelching rumors that she was keeping a Bengal tiger from the sets of Catwoman as a "pet."

Her next film appearance was in the Oprah Winfrey-produced ABC television movie "Their Eyes Were Watching God" (2005), an adaptation of Zora Neale Hurston's novel, in which Berry portrayed Janie Crawford, a free-spirited woman whose unconventional sexual mores upset her 1920s contemporaries in a small community. She was nominated for another Primetime Emmy Award for this TV film. Meanwhile, she voiced the character of Cappy, one of the many mechanical beings in the animated feature "Robots" (2005).

Berry is involved in production of films and television. She served as executive producer on "Introducing Dorothy Dandridge" in 1999, and "Lackawanna Blues" in 2005. In 2007, Berry both produced and starred in the thriller "Perfect Stranger" with Bruce Willis, and starred in "Things We Lost in the Fire" with Benicio del Toro, the first film in which she worked with a female director, Danish Susanne Bier, giving her a new feeling of "thinking the same way", which she appreciated. Berry then starred in the film "Frankie and Alice", in which she plays Frankie Murdoch, a young multiracial American women with dissociative identity disorder struggling against her alter personality to retain her true self. She was awarded the African-American Film Critics Association Award for Best Actress and was nominated for the Golden Globe Award for Best Actress – Motion Picture Drama. Berry was one of the highest-paid actresses in Hollywood during the 2000s, earning an estimated $10 million per film. On April 3, 2007, she was awarded a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame in front of the Kodak Theatre at 6801 Hollywood Boulevard for her contributions to the film industry.

, Berry's worldwide box office gross has been more than USD$3.3 billion. In 2011, she appeared in "New Year's Eve". She played one of the leads in the film "Cloud Atlas", which was released in October 2012.

On October 4, 2013, Berry signed on to star in the CBS drama series "Extant". Berry played Molly Woods, an astronaut who struggles to reconnect with her husband and android son after spending 13 months in space. The show premiered on July 9, 2014. She served as a co-executive producer on the series. Berry has served for many years as the face of Revlon cosmetics and as the face of Versace. The Coty Inc. fragrance company signed Berry to market her debut fragrance in March 2008. Berry was delighted, saying that she had created her own fragrances at home by mixing scents.

In March 2014 Berry launched a new production company, 606 Films, with producing partner Elaine Goldsmith-Thomas. It is named after the Anti-Paparazzi Bill, SB 606, that the actress pushed for and which was signed into law by California Governor Jerry Brown in the fall of 2013. The new company emerged as part of a deal for Berry to star in the CBS sci-fi drama series "Extant". 606 Films is housed within CBS.

In February 2000, Berry was involved in a traffic collision and left the scene. She pleaded no contest to misdemeanor leaving the scene of an accident.

Berry dated Chicago dentist John Ronan from March 1989 to October 1991. In November 1993, Ronan sued Berry for $80,000 in what he claimed were unpaid loans to help launch her career. Berry contended that the money was a gift, and a judge dismissed the case because Ronan did not list Berry as a debtor when he filed for bankruptcy in 1992. According to Berry, a beating from a former abusive boyfriend during the filming of "The Last Boy Scout" punctured her eardrum and caused her to lose eighty percent of her hearing in her left ear. Berry has never named the abuser but has said that he is someone well known in Hollywood.

Berry first saw baseball player David Justice on TV playing in an MTV celebrity baseball game in February 1992. When a reporter from Justice's hometown of Cincinnati told her that Justice was a fan, Berry gave her phone number to the reporter to give to Justice. Berry married Justice shortly after midnight on January 1, 1993. Following their separation in February 1996, Berry stated publicly that she was so depressed that she considered taking her own life. Berry and Justice were officially divorced on June 24, 1997.

Berry married her second husband, singer-songwriter Eric Benét, on January 24, 2001, following a two-year courtship, but by early October 2003 they had separated, with the divorce finalized on January 3, 2005. Benét underwent treatment for sex addiction in 2002. In November 2005, Berry began dating French Canadian model Gabriel Aubry, whom she met at a Versace photoshoot. Berry gave birth to their daughter in March 2008. On April 30, 2010, Berry and Aubry announced their separation.

After their 2010 separation, Berry and Aubry became involved in a highly publicized custody battle, centered primarily on Berry's desire to move with their daughter from Los Angeles, where Berry and Aubry resided, to France, the home of French actor Olivier Martinez, whom Berry had started dating in 2010 after they met while filming "Dark Tide" in South Africa. Aubry objected to the move on the grounds that it would interfere with their joint custody arrangement. In November 2012, a judge denied Berry's request to move the couple's daughter to France in light of Aubry's objections. Less than two weeks later, on November 22, 2012, Aubry and Martinez were both treated at a hospital for injuries after engaging in a physical altercation at Berry's residence. Martinez performed a citizen's arrest on Aubry, and because it was considered a domestic violence incident, was granted a temporary emergency protective order preventing Aubry from coming within 100 yards of Berry, Martinez, and the child with whom he shares custody with Berry, until November 29, 2012. In turn, Aubry obtained a temporary restraining order against Martinez on November 26, 2012, asserting that the fight began when Martinez threatened to kill Aubry if he did not allow the couple to move to France. Leaked court documents included photos showing significant injuries to Aubry's face, which were widely displayed in the media.

On November 29, 2012, Berry's lawyer announced that Berry and Aubry had reached an amicable custody agreement in court. In June 2014, a Superior Court ruling called for Berry to pay Aubry $16,000 a month in child support (around 200k/year) as well as a retroactive payment of $115,000 and a sum of $300,000 for Aubry's attorney fees. Berry and Martinez confirmed their engagement in March 2012, and married in France on July 13, 2013. In October 2013, Berry gave birth to their son. After two years of marriage, in 2015 the couple announced they were divorcing. The divorce became final in December 2016.

Along with Pierce Brosnan, Cindy Crawford, Jane Seymour, Dick Van Dyke, Téa Leoni, and Daryl Hannah, Berry successfully fought in 2006 against the Cabrillo Port Liquefied Natural Gas facility that was proposed off the coast of Malibu. Berry said, "I care about the air we breathe, I care about the marine life and the ecosystem of the ocean." In May 2007, Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger vetoed the facility. Hasty Pudding Theatricals gave her its 2006 "Woman of The Year" award. Berry took part in a nearly 2,000-house cell-phone bank campaign for Barack Obama in February 2008. In April 2013, she appeared in a video clip for Gucci's "Chime for Change" campaign that aims to raise funds and awareness of women's issues in terms of education, health, and justice. In August 2013, Berry testified alongside Jennifer Garner before the California State Assembly's Judiciary Committee in support of a bill that would protect celebrities' children from harassment by photographers. The bill passed in September.

Berry was ranked No. 1 on "People" "50 Most Beautiful People in the World" list in 2003 after making the top ten seven times and appeared No. 1 on "FHM" "100 Sexiest Women in the World" the same year. She was named "Esquire" magazine's "Sexiest Woman Alive" in October 2008, about which she stated: "I don't know exactly what it means, but being 42 and having just had a baby, I think I'll take it." "Men's Health" ranked her at No. 35 on their "100 Hottest Women of All-Time" list. In 2009, she was voted #23 on "Empire"'s 100 Sexiest Film Stars. The same year, rapper Hurricane Chris released a song entitled "Halle Berry (She's Fine)", extolling Berry's beauty and sex appeal. At the age of 42 (in 2008), she was named the “Sexiest Black Woman” by Access Hollywood’s TV One Access survey. Born to an African-American father and a white mother, Berry has stated that her biracial background was "painful and confusing" when she was a young woman, and she made the decision early on to identify as a black woman because she knew that was how she would be perceived.





</doc>
<doc id="43337" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43337" title="Katharine Hepburn">
Katharine Hepburn

Katharine Houghton Hepburn (May 12, 1907 – June 29, 2003) was an American actress. Known for her fierce independence and spirited personality, Hepburn was a leading lady in Hollywood for more than 60 years. She appeared in a range of genres, from screwball comedy to literary drama, and she received four Academy Awards—a record for any performer—for Best Actress. In 1999, Hepburn was named by the American Film Institute as the greatest female star of Classic Hollywood Cinema.

Raised in Connecticut by wealthy, progressive parents, Hepburn began to act while studying at Bryn Mawr College. After four years in the theatre, favorable reviews of her work on Broadway brought her to the attention of Hollywood. Her early years in the film industry were marked with success, including an Academy Award for her third picture, "Morning Glory" (1933), but this was followed by a series of commercial failures that led her to be labeled "box office poison" in 1938. Hepburn masterminded her own comeback, buying out her contract with RKO Radio Pictures and acquiring the film rights to "The Philadelphia Story", which she sold on the condition that she be the star. In the 1940s, she was contracted to Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer, where her career focused on an alliance with Spencer Tracy. The screen-partnership spanned 25 years and produced nine movies.

Hepburn challenged herself in the latter half of her life, as she regularly appeared in Shakespearean stage productions and tackled a range of literary roles. She found a niche playing middle-aged spinsters, such as in "The African Queen" (1951), a persona the public embraced. Three more Oscars came for her work in "Guess Who's Coming to Dinner" (1967), "The Lion in Winter" (1968), and "On Golden Pond" (1981). In the 1970s, she began appearing in television films, which became the focus of her career in later life. She remained active into old age, making her final screen appearance in 1994 at the age of 87. After a period of inactivity and ill health, Hepburn died in 2003 at the age of 96.

Hepburn famously shunned the Hollywood publicity machine and refused to conform to society's expectations of women. She was outspoken, assertive, athletic, and wore trousers before it was fashionable for women to do so. She was briefly married as a young woman, but thereafter lived independently. A 26-year affair with her co-star Spencer Tracy was hidden from the public. With her unconventional lifestyle and the independent characters she brought to the screen, Hepburn epitomized the "modern woman" in the 20th-century United States and is remembered as an important cultural figure.

Hepburn was born on May 12, 1907, in Hartford, Connecticut, the second of six children. Her parents were Thomas Norval Hepburn (1879–1962), a urologist at Hartford Hospital, and Katharine Martha Houghton (1878–1951), a feminist campaigner. Both parents fought for social change in the US: Thomas Hepburn helped establish the New England Social Hygiene Association, which educated the public about venereal disease, while the elder Katharine headed the Connecticut Woman Suffrage Association and later campaigned for birth control with Margaret Sanger. As a child, Hepburn joined her mother on several "Votes For Women" demonstrations. The Hepburn children were raised to exercise freedom of speech and encouraged to think and debate on any topic they wished. Her parents were criticized by the community for their progressive views, which stimulated Hepburn to fight against barriers she encountered. Hepburn said she realized from a young age that she was the product of "two very remarkable parents", and credited her "enormously lucky" upbringing with providing the foundation for her success. She remained close to her family throughout her life.

The young Hepburn was a tomboy who liked to call herself Jimmy, and cut her hair short. Thomas Hepburn was eager for his children to use their minds and bodies to the limit, and taught them to swim, run, dive, ride, wrestle, and play golf and tennis. Golf became a passion of Hepburn's; she took daily lessons and became very adept, reaching the semi-final of the Connecticut Young Women's Golf Championship. She loved swimming in Long Island Sound, and took ice-cold baths every morning in the belief that "the bitterer the medicine, the better it was for you." Hepburn was a fan of movies from a young age, and went to see one every Saturday night. She would put on plays and perform for her neighbors with friends and siblings for 50 cents a ticket to raise money for the Navajo people.

On April 3, 1921, while visiting friends in Greenwich Village, Hepburn discovered the body of her adored older brother, Tom, dead from an apparent suicide. He had tied a sheet around a beam and hanged himself. The Hepburn family denied it was suicide and maintained that Tom's death must have been an experiment that had gone wrong. The incident made the teenage Hepburn nervous, moody, and suspicious of people. She shied away from other children, dropped out of Oxford School, and began receiving private tutoring. For many years she used Tom's birthday (November 8) as her own. It was not until her 1991 autobiography, "Me: Stories of My Life," that Hepburn revealed her true birth date.

In 1924 Hepburn gained a place at Bryn Mawr College. She attended the institution primarily to satisfy her mother, who had studied there, and recalled disliking the experience. It was the first time she had been in school for several years, and she was self-conscious and uncomfortable with her classmates. She struggled with the scholastic demands of university, and once was suspended for smoking in her room. Hepburn was drawn to acting, but roles in college plays were conditional on good grades. Once her marks had improved, she began performing regularly. She performed the lead role in a production of "The Woman in the Moon" in her senior year, and the positive response it received cemented Hepburn's plans to pursue a theatrical career. She graduated with a degree in history and philosophy in June 1928.

Hepburn left university determined to become an actress. The day after graduating, she traveled to Baltimore to meet Edwin H. Knopf, who ran a successful stock theatre company. Impressed by her eagerness, Knopf cast Hepburn in his current production, "The Czarina". She received good reviews for her small role, and the "Printed Word" described her performance as "arresting". She was given a part in the following week's show, but her second performance was less well received. She was criticized for her shrill voice, and so left Baltimore to study with a voice tutor in New York City.

Knopf decided to produce "The Big Pond" in New York and appointed Hepburn the understudy to the leading lady. A week before opening, the lead was fired and replaced with Hepburn, which gave her a starring role only four weeks into her theatre career. On opening night, she turned up late, mixed her lines, tripped over her feet, and spoke too quickly to be comprehensible. She was immediately fired, and the original leading lady rehired. Undeterred, Hepburn joined forces with the producer Arthur Hopkins and accepted the role of a schoolgirl in "These Days". Her Broadway debut came on November 12, 1928, at the Cort Theatre, but reviews for the show were poor and it closed after eight nights. Hopkins promptly hired Hepburn as the lead understudy in Philip Barry's play "Holiday". In early December, after only two weeks, she quit to marry Ludlow Ogden Smith, a college acquaintance. She planned to leave the theatre behind, but began to miss the work and quickly resumed the understudy role in "Holiday", which she held for six months.

In 1929, Hepburn turned down a role with the Theatre Guild to play the lead in "Death Takes a Holiday". She felt the role was perfect, but again she was fired. She went back to the Guild and took an understudy role for minimum pay in "A Month in the Country". In the spring of 1930, Hepburn joined a theatre company in Stockbridge, Massachusetts. She left halfway through the summer season, and continued studying with a drama tutor. In early 1931, she was cast in the Broadway production of "Art and Mrs. Bottle". She was released from the role after the playwright took a dislike to her, saying "She looks a fright, her manner is objectionable, and she has no talent", but Hepburn was rehired when no other actress could be found. It went on to be a small success.

Hepburn appeared in a number of plays with a summer stock company in Ivoryton, Connecticut, and she proved to be a hit. During the summer of 1931, Philip Barry asked her to appear in his new play, "The Animal Kingdom", alongside Leslie Howard. They began rehearsals in November, Hepburn feeling sure the role would make her a star, but Howard disliked the actress and again she was fired. When she asked Barry why she had been let go, he responded, "Well, to be brutally frank, you weren't very good." This unsettled the self-assured Hepburn, but she continued to look for work. She took a small role in an upcoming play, but as rehearsals began she was asked to read for the lead in the Greek fable "The Warrior's Husband".

"The Warrior's Husband" proved to be Hepburn's breakout performance. Biographer Charles Higham states that the role was ideal for the actress, requiring an aggressive energy and athleticism, and she enthusiastically involved herself with its production. The play opened March 11, 1932, at the Morosco Theatre on Broadway. Hepburn's first entrance called for her to leap down a narrow stairway with a stag over her shoulder, wearing a short silver tunic. The show ran for three months, and Hepburn received positive reviews. Richard Garland of the "New York World-Telegram" wrote, "It's been many a night since so glowing a performance has brightened the Broadway scene."

A scout for the Hollywood agent Leland Hayward spotted Hepburn's appearance in "The Warrior's Husband", and asked her to test for the part of Sydney Fairfield in the upcoming RKO film "A Bill of Divorcement". Director George Cukor was impressed by what he saw: "There was this odd creature," he recalled, "she was unlike anybody I'd ever heard." He particularly liked the manner in which she picked up a glass: "I thought she was very talented in that action." Offered the role, Hepburn demanded $1,500 a week, a large amount for an unknown actress. Cukor encouraged the studio to accept her demands and they signed Hepburn to a temporary contract with a three-week guarantee. RKO head David O. Selznick recounted that he took a "tremendous chance" in casting the unusual actress.

Hepburn arrived in California in July 1932, at 25 years old. She starred in "A Bill of Divorcement" opposite John Barrymore, but showed no sign of intimidation. Although she struggled to adapt to the nature of film acting, Hepburn was fascinated by the industry from the start. The picture was a success and Hepburn received positive reviews. Mordaunt Hall of "The New York Times" called her performance "exceptionally fine ... Miss Hepburn's characterization is one of the finest seen on the screen". The "Variety" review declared, "Standout here is the smash impression made by Katharine Hepburn in her first picture assignment. She has a vital something that sets her apart from the picture galaxy." On the strength of "A Bill of Divorcement", RKO signed her to a long-term contract. George Cukor became a lifetime friend and colleague—he and Hepburn made ten films together.

Hepburn's second film was "Christopher Strong" (1933), the story of an aviator and her affair with a married man. The picture was not commercially successful, but Hepburn's reviews were good. Regina Crewe wrote in the "Journal American" that although her mannerisms were grating, "they compel attention, and they fascinate an audience. She is a distinct, definite, positive personality." Hepburn's third picture confirmed her as a major actress in Hollywood. For playing aspiring actress Eva Lovelace—a role intended for Constance Bennett—in "Morning Glory", she won an Academy Award for Best Actress. She had seen the script on the desk of producer Pandro S. Berman and, convinced that she was born to play the part, insisted that the role be hers. Hepburn chose not to attend the awards ceremony—as she would not for the duration of her career—but was thrilled with the win. Her success continued with the role of Jo in the film "Little Women" (1933). The picture was a hit, one of the film industry's biggest successes to date, and Hepburn won the Best Actress prize at the Venice Film Festival. "Little Women" was one of Hepburn's personal favorites and she was proud of her performance, later saying, "I defy anyone to be as good [as Jo] as I was".

By the end of 1933 Hepburn was a respected film actress, but she yearned to prove herself on Broadway. Jed Harris, one of the most successful theatre producers of the 1920s, was going through a career slump. He asked Hepburn to appear in the play "The Lake", which she agreed to do for a low salary. Before she was given leave, RKO asked that she film "Spitfire" (1934). Hepburn's role in the movie was Trigger Hicks, an uneducated mountain girl. It is widely considered one of her worst films, and Hepburn received poor reviews for the effort. She kept a picture of Hicks in her bedroom throughout her life to "[keep] me humble."

"The Lake" previewed in Washington, D.C., where there was a large advance sale. Harris's poor direction had eroded Hepburn's confidence, and she struggled with the performance. Despite this, Harris moved the play to New York without further rehearsal. It opened at the Martin Beck Theatre on December 26, 1933, and Hepburn was roundly panned by the critics. Dorothy Parker quipped, "She runs the gamut of emotions all the way from A to B." Already tied to a ten-week contract, she had to endure the embarrassment of rapidly declining box office sales. Harris decided to take the show to Chicago, saying to Hepburn, "My dear, the only interest I have in you is the money I can make out of you." Hepburn refused, and paid Harris $14,000 to close the production instead. She later referred to Harris as "hands-down the most diabolical person I have ever met", and claimed this experience was important in teaching her to take responsibility for her career.

After the failure of "Spitfire" and "The Lake", RKO cast Hepburn in "The Little Minister" (1934), based on a Victorian novel by James Barrie, in an attempt to repeat the success of "Little Women". There was no such recurrence, and the picture was a commercial failure. The romantic drama "Break of Hearts" (1935) with Charles Boyer was poorly reviewed and also lost money. After three forgettable films, success returned to Hepburn with "Alice Adams" (1935), the story of a girl's desperation to climb the social ladder. Hepburn loved the book and was delighted to be offered the role. The film was a hit, one of Hepburn's personal favorites, and gave the actress her second Oscar nomination. She received the second most votes, after winner Bette Davis.

Given the choice of her next feature, Hepburn decided to star in George Cukor's new project, "Sylvia Scarlett" (1935), which paired her for the first time with Cary Grant. Her hair was cut short for the part, as her character masquerades as a boy for much of the film. Critics disliked "Sylvia Scarlett" and it was unpopular with the public. She next played Mary Stuart in John Ford's "Mary of Scotland" (1936), which met with a similarly poor reception. "A Woman Rebels" (1936) followed, a Victorian era drama where Hepburn's character defied convention by having a child out of wedlock. "Quality Street" (1937) also had a period setting, this time a comedy. Neither movie was popular with the public, which meant she had made four unsuccessful pictures in a row.

Alongside a series of unpopular films, problems arose from Hepburn's attitude. She had a difficult relationship with the press, with whom she could be rude and provocative. When asked if she had any children, she snapped back, "Yes I have five: two white and three colored." She would not give interviews and denied requests for autographs, which earned her the nickname "Katharine of Arrogance". The public was also baffled by her boyish behavior and fashion choices, and she became a largely unpopular figure. Hepburn sensed that she needed to leave Hollywood, so she returned east to star in a theatrical adaptation of "Jane Eyre". It had a successful tour, but, uncertain about the script and unwilling to risk failure after the disaster of "The Lake", Hepburn decided against taking the show to Broadway. Towards the end of 1936, Hepburn vied for the role of Scarlett O'Hara in "Gone with the Wind". Producer David O. Selznick refused to offer her the part because he felt she had no sex appeal. He reportedly told Hepburn, "I can't see Rhett Butler chasing you for twelve years."

Hepburn's next feature, "Stage Door" (1937), paired her with Ginger Rogers in a role that mirrored her own life—that of a wealthy society girl trying to make it as an actress. Hepburn was praised for her work at early previews, which gave her top billing over Rogers. The film was nominated for Best Picture at the Academy Awards, but it was not the box-office hit RKO had hoped for. Industry pundits blamed Hepburn for the small profit, but the studio continued its commitment to resurrecting her popularity. She was cast in Howard Hawks' screwball comedy "Bringing Up Baby" (1938), where she played a flighty heiress who loses a leopard while trying to woo a palaeontologist (Cary Grant). She approached the physical comedy of the film with confidence, and took tips on comedic timing from her costar Walter Catlett. "Bringing Up Baby" was acclaimed by critics, but it was nevertheless unsuccessful at the box office. With the genre and Grant both hugely popular at the time, biographer A. Scott Berg believes the blame lay with moviegoers' rejection of Hepburn.

After the release of "Bringing up Baby", the Independent Theatre Owners of America included Hepburn on a list of actors considered "box office poison". Her reputation at a low, the next film RKO offered her was "Mother Carey's Chickens", a B movie with poor prospects. Hepburn turned it down, and instead opted to buy out her contract for $75,000. Many actors were afraid to leave the stability of the studio system at the time, but Hepburn's personal wealth meant she could afford to be independent. She signed on for the film version of "Holiday" (1938) with Columbia Pictures, pairing her for the third time with Grant, to play a stifled society girl who finds joy with her sister's fiancé. The comedy was positively reviewed, but it failed to draw much of an audience, and the next script offered to Hepburn came with a salary of $10,000—less than she had received at the start of her film career. Reflecting on this change in fortunes, Andrew Britton writes of Hepburn, "No other star has emerged with greater rapidity or with more ecstatic acclaim. No other star, either, has become so unpopular so quickly for so long a time."

Following this decline in her career, Hepburn took action to create her own comeback vehicle. She left Hollywood to look for a stage project, and signed on to star in Philip Barry's new play, "The Philadelphia Story". It was tailored to showcase the actress, with the character of socialite Tracy Lord incorporating a mixture of humor, aggression, nervousness, and vulnerability. Howard Hughes, Hepburn's partner at the time, sensed that the play could be her ticket back to Hollywood stardom and bought her the film rights before it even debuted on stage. "The Philadelphia Story" first toured the United States, to positive reviews, and then opened in New York at the Schubert Theatre on March 28, 1939. It was a big hit, critically and financially, running for 417 performances and then going on a second successful tour.

Several of the major film studios approached Hepburn to produce the movie version of Barry's play. She chose to sell the rights to Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer (MGM), Hollywood's number one studio, on the condition that she be the star. As part of the deal she also received the director of her choice, George Cukor, and picked James Stewart and Cary Grant (to whom she ceded top-billing) as co-stars. Before filming began, Hepburn shrewdly noted, "I don't want to make a grand entrance in this picture. Moviegoers ... think I'm too la-di-da or something. A lot of people want to see me fall flat on my face." Thus the film began with Grant knocking the actress flat on her backside. Berg describes how the character was crafted to have audiences "laugh at her enough that they would ultimately sympathize with her", which Hepburn felt was crucial in "recreating" her public image. "The Philadelphia Story" was one of the biggest hits of 1940, breaking records at Radio City Music Hall. The review in "Time" declared, "Come on back, Katie, all is forgiven." Herb Golden of "Variety" stated, "It's Katharine Hepburn's picture ... The perfect conception of all flighty but characterful Main Line socialite gals rolled into one, the story without her is almost inconceivable." Hepburn was nominated for her third Academy Award for Best Actress, and won the New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Actress.

Hepburn was also responsible for the development of her next project, the romantic comedy "Woman of the Year" about a political journalist and sports journalist whose relationship is challenged by her independence. The idea for the film was proposed to her by Garson Kanin in 1941, who recalled how Hepburn contributed to the script. She presented the finished product to MGM and demanded $250,000—half for her, half for the authors. Her terms accepted, Hepburn was also given the director and co-star of her choice, George Stevens and Spencer Tracy. Released in 1942, "Woman of the Year" was another success. Critics praised the chemistry between the stars, and, says Higham, noted Hepburn's "increasing maturity and polish". The "World-Telegram" commended two "brilliant performances", and Hepburn received a fourth Academy Award nomination. During the course of the movie, Hepburn signed a star contract with MGM.

In 1942, Hepburn returned to Broadway to appear in another Philip Barry play, "Without Love", which was also written with the actress in mind. Critics were unenthusiastic about the production but with Hepburn's popularity at a high it ran for 16 sold-out weeks. MGM was eager to reunite Tracy and Hepburn for a new picture, and settled on "Keeper of the Flame" (1942). A dark mystery with a propaganda message on the dangers of fascism, the film was seen by Hepburn as an opportunity to make a worthy political statement. It received poor notices but was a financial success, confirming the popularity of the Tracy–Hepburn pairing.

Since "Woman of the Year", Hepburn had committed to a romantic relationship with Tracy and dedicated herself to helping the star, who suffered from alcoholism and insomnia. Her career slowed as a result, and she worked less for the remainder of the decade than she had done in the 1930s—notably by not appearing on-stage again until 1950. Her only appearance in 1943 was a cameo in the morale-building wartime film "Stage Door Canteen", playing herself. She took an atypical role in 1944, playing a Chinese peasant in the high-budget drama "Dragon Seed". Hepburn was enthusiastic about the film, but it met with a tepid response and she was described as miscast. She then reunited with Tracy for the film version of "Without Love" (1945), after which she turned down a role in "The Razor's Edge" to support Tracy through his return to Broadway. "Without Love" received poor reviews, but a new Tracy–Hepburn picture was a big event and it was popular on release, selling a record number of tickets over Easter-weekend 1945.

Hepburn's next film was "Undercurrent" (1946), a film noir with Robert Taylor and Robert Mitchum that was poorly received. A fourth film with Tracy came in 1947: a drama set in the American Old West entitled "The Sea of Grass". Similarly to "Keeper of the Flame" and "Without Love", a lukewarm response from critics did not stop it from being a financial success both at home and abroad. The same year, Hepburn portrayed Clara Wieck Schumann in "Song of Love". She trained intensively with a pianist for the role. By the time of its release in October, Hepburn's career had been significantly affected by her public opposition to the growing anti-communist movement in Hollywood. Viewed by some as dangerously progressive, she was not offered work for nine months and people reportedly threw things at screenings of "Song of Love". Her next film role came unexpectedly, as she agreed to replace Claudette Colbert only days before shooting began on Frank Capra's political drama "State of the Union" (1948). Tracy had long been signed to play the male lead, and so Hepburn was already familiar with the script and stepped up for the fifth Tracy–Hepburn picture. Critics responded positively to the film and it performed well at the box-office.

Tracy and Hepburn appeared onscreen together for a third consecutive year in the 1949 film "Adam's Rib". Like "Woman of the Year", it was a "battle of the sexes" comedy and was written specifically for the duo by their friends Garson Kanin and Ruth Gordon. A story of married lawyers who oppose each other in court, Hepburn described it as "perfect for [Tracy] and me". Although her political views still prompted scattered picketing at theatres around the country, "Adam's Rib" was a hit, favorably reviewed and the most profitable Tracy–Hepburn picture to date. "The New York Times" critic Bosley Crowther was full of praise for the film and hailed the duo's "perfect compatibility".

The 1950s saw Hepburn take on a series of professional challenges, and stretch herself further than at any other point in her life at an age when most other actresses began to retreat. Berg describes the decade as "the heart of her vast legacy" and "the period in which she truly came into her own." In January 1950, Hepburn ventured into Shakespeare, playing Rosalind on stage in "As You Like It". She hoped to prove that she could play already established material, and said, "It's better to try something difficult and flop than to play it safe all the time." It opened at the Cort Theatre in New York to a capacity audience, and was virtually sold out for 148 shows. The production then went on tour. Reviews for Hepburn varied, but she was noted as the only leading lady in Hollywood who was performing high-caliber material onstage.

In 1951, Hepburn filmed "The African Queen", her first movie in Technicolor. She played Rose Sayer, a prim spinster missionary living in German East Africa at the outbreak of World War I. Costarring Humphrey Bogart, "The African Queen" was shot mostly on location in the Belgian Congo, an opportunity Hepburn embraced. It proved a difficult experience, however, and Hepburn became ill with dysentery during filming. Later in life, she released a memoir about the experience. The movie was released at the end of 1951 to popular support and critical acclaim, and gave Hepburn her fifth Best Actress nomination at the Academy Awards. The first successful film she had made without Tracy since "The Philadelphia Story" a decade earlier, it proved that she could be a hit without him and fully reestablished her popularity.

Hepburn went on to make the sports comedy "Pat and Mike" (1952), the second film written specifically as a Tracy–Hepburn vehicle by Kanin and Gordon. She was a keen athlete, and Kanin later described this as his inspiration for the film: "As I watched Kate playing tennis one day ... it occurred to me that her audience was missing a treat." Hepburn was under pressure to perform several sports to a high standard, many of which did not end up in the film. "Pat and Mike" was one of the team's most popular and critically acclaimed films, and it was also Hepburn's personal favorite of the nine films she made with Tracy. The performance brought her a nomination for the Golden Globe Award for Best Actress – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy.
In the summer of 1952, Hepburn appeared in London's West End for a ten-week run of George Bernard Shaw's "The Millionairess". Her parents had read Shaw to her when she was a child, which made the play a special experience for the actress. Two years of intense work had left her exhausted, however, and her friend Constance Collier wrote that Hepburn was "on the verge of a nervous breakdown". Widely acclaimed, "The Millionairess" was brought to Broadway. In October 1952 it opened at the Shubert Theatre, where despite a lukewarm critical response it sold out its ten-week run. Hepburn subsequently tried to get the play adapted into a film: a script was written by Preston Sturges, and she offered to work for nothing and pay the director herself, but no studio picked up the project. She later referred to this as the biggest disappointment of her career.

"Pat and Mike" was the last film Hepburn completed on her MGM contract, making her free to select her own projects. She spent two years resting and traveling, before committing to David Lean's romantic drama "Summertime" (1955). The movie was filmed in Venice, with Hepburn playing a lonely spinster who has a passionate love affair. She described it as "a very emotional part" and found it fascinating to work with Lean. At her own insistence, Hepburn performed a fall into a canal and developed a chronic eye infection as a result. The role earned her another Academy Award nomination and has been cited as some of her finest work. Lean later said it was his personal favorite of the films he made, and Hepburn his favorite actress. The following year, Hepburn spent six months touring Australia with the Old Vic theatre company, playing Portia in "The Merchant of Venice", Kate in "The Taming of the Shrew", and Isabella in "Measure for Measure". The tour was successful and Hepburn earned significant plaudits for the effort.

Hepburn received an Academy Award nomination for the second year running for her work opposite Burt Lancaster in "The Rainmaker" (1956). Again she played a lonely woman empowered by a love affair, and it became apparent that Hepburn had found a niche in playing "love-starved spinsters" that critics and audiences enjoyed. Hepburn said of playing such roles, "With Lizzie Curry ["The Rainmaker"] and Jane Hudson ["Summertime"] and Rosie Sayer ["The African Queen"]—I was playing me. It wasn't difficult for me to play those women, because I'm the maiden aunt." Less success that year came from "The Iron Petticoat" (1956), a reworking of the classic comedy "Ninotchka", with Bob Hope. Hepburn played a cold-hearted Soviet pilot, a performance Bosley Crowther called "horrible". It was a critical and commercial failure, and Hepburn considered it the worst film on her resume.

Tracy and Hepburn reunited on screen for the first time in five years for the office-based comedy "Desk Set" (1957). Berg notes that it worked as a hybrid of their earlier romantic-comedy successes and Hepburn's spinster persona, but it performed poorly at the box-office. That summer, Hepburn returned to Shakespeare. Appearing in Stratford, Connecticut, at the American Shakespeare Theatre, she repeated her Portia in "The Merchant of Venice" and played Beatrice in "Much Ado About Nothing". The shows were positively received.

After two years away from the screen, Hepburn starred in a film adaptation of Tennessee Williams' controversial play "Suddenly, Last Summer" (1959) with Elizabeth Taylor and Montgomery Clift. The movie was shot in London, and was "a completely miserable experience" for Hepburn. She clashed with director Joseph L. Mankiewicz during filming, which culminated with her spitting at him in disgust. The picture was a financial success, and her work as creepy aunt Violet Venable gave Hepburn her eighth Oscar nomination. Williams was pleased with the performance, writing, "Kate is a playwright's dream-actress. She makes dialogue sound better than it is by a matchless beauty and clarity of diction". He wrote "The Night of the Iguana" (1961) with Hepburn in mind, but the actress, although flattered, felt the play was wrong for her and declined the part, which went to Bette Davis.

Hepburn returned to Stratford in the summer of 1960 to play Viola in "Twelfth Night" and Cleopatra in "Antony and Cleopatra". The "New York Post" wrote of her Cleopatra, "Hepburn offers a highly versatile performance ... once or twice going in for her famous mannerisms and always being fascinating to watch." Hepburn herself was proud of the role. Her repertoire was further improved when she appeared in Sidney Lumet's film version of Eugene O'Neill's "Long Day's Journey Into Night" (1962). It was a low-budget production, and she appeared in the film for a tenth of her established salary. She called it "the greatest [play] this country has ever produced" and the role of morphine-addicted Mary Tyrone "the most challenging female role in American drama", and felt her performance was the best screen work of her career. "Long Day's Journey Into Night" earned Hepburn an Oscar nomination and the Best Actress Award at the Cannes Film Festival. It remains one of her most praised performances.

Following the completion of "Long Day's Journey Into Night", Hepburn took a break in her career to care for ailing Spencer Tracy. She did not work again until 1967's "Guess Who's Coming to Dinner", her ninth film with Tracy. The movie dealt with the subject of interracial marriage, with Hepburn's niece, Katharine Houghton, playing her daughter. Tracy was dying by this point, suffering the effects of heart disease, and Houghton later commented that her aunt was "extremely tense" during the production. Tracy died 17 days after filming his last scene. "Guess Who's Coming to Dinner" was a triumphant return for Hepburn and her most commercially successful picture to that point. She won her second Best Actress Award at the Oscars, 34 years after winning her first. Hepburn felt the award was not just for her, but was also given to honor Tracy.

Hepburn quickly returned to acting after Tracy's death, choosing to preoccupy herself as a remedy against grief. She received numerous scripts and chose to play Eleanor of Aquitaine in "The Lion in Winter" (1968), a part she called "fascinating". She read extensively in preparation for the role, in which she starred opposite Peter O'Toole. Filming took place in Montmajour Abbey in the south of France, an experience she loved despite being—according to director Anthony Harvey—"enormously vulnerable" throughout. John Russell Taylor of "The Times" suggested that Eleanor was "the performance of her ... career", and proved that she was "a growing, developing, still surprising actress". The movie was nominated in all the major categories at the Academy Awards, and for the second year running Hepburn won the Oscar for Best Actress (shared with Barbra Streisand for "Funny Girl"). The role, combined with her performance in "Guess Who's Coming to Dinner", also received a British Academy Film Award (BAFTA) for Best Actress. Hepburn's next appearance was in "The Madwoman of Chaillot" (1969), which she filmed in Nice immediately after completing "The Lion in Winter". The picture was a failure critically and financially, and reviews targeted Hepburn for giving a misguided performance.

From December 1969 to August 1970, Hepburn starred in the Broadway musical "Coco", about the life of Coco Chanel. She admitted that before the show, she had never sat through a theatrical musical. She was not a strong singer, but found the offer irresistible and, as Berg puts it, "what she lacked in euphony she made up for in guts". The actress took vocal lessons six times a week in preparation for the show. She was nervous about every performance, and recalled "wondering what the hell I was doing there." Reviews for the production were mediocre, but Hepburn herself was praised and "Coco" was popular with the public—with its run twice extended. She later said "Coco" marked the first time she accepted that the public was not against her, but actually seemed to love her. Her work earned a Tony Award nomination for Best Actress in a Musical.

Hepburn stayed active throughout the 1970s, focusing on roles described by Andrew Britton as "either a devouring mother or a batty old lady living [alone]". First she traveled to Spain to film a version of Euripides' "The Trojan Women" (1971) alongside Vanessa Redgrave. When asked why she had taken the role, she responded that she wanted to broaden her range and try everything while she still had time. The movie was poorly received, but the Kansas City Film Critics Circle named Hepburn's performance the best from an actress that year. In 1971 she signed on to star in an adaptation of Graham Greene's "Travels with My Aunt", but was unhappy with early versions of the script and took to rewriting it herself. The studio disliked her changes, so Hepburn abandoned the project and was replaced with Maggie Smith. Her next film, an adaptation of Edward Albee's "A Delicate Balance" (1973) directed by Tony Richardson, had a small release and received generally unfavorable reviews.

In 1973, Hepburn ventured into television for the first time, starring in a production of Tennessee Williams' "The Glass Menagerie". She had been wary of the medium but it proved to be one of the main television events of the year, scoring high in the Nielsen ratings. Hepburn received an Emmy Award nomination for playing wistful Southern mother Amanda Wingfield, which opened her mind to future work on the small screen. Her next project was the television movie "Love Among the Ruins" (1975), a London-based Edwardian drama with her friend Laurence Olivier. It received positive reviews and high ratings, and earned Hepburn her only Emmy Award.

Hepburn made her only appearance at the Academy Awards in 1974, to present the Irving G. Thalberg Memorial Award to Lawrence Weingarten. She received a standing ovation, and joked with the audience, "I'm very happy I didn't hear anyone call out 'It's about time'." The following year, she was paired with John Wayne in the western "Rooster Cogburn", a sequel to his Oscar-winning film "True Grit". Echoing her "African Queen" character, Hepburn again played a deeply religious spinster who teams up with a masculine loner to avenge a family member's death. The movie received mediocre reviews. Its casting was enough to draw some people to the box office, but it did not meet studio expectations and was only moderately successful.

In 1976, Hepburn returned to Broadway for a three-month run of Enid Bagnold's play "A Matter of Gravity". The role of eccentric Mrs. Basil was deemed a perfect showcase for the actress, and the play was popular despite poor reviews. It later went on a successful nationwide tour. During its Los Angeles run, Hepburn fractured her hip, but she chose to continue the tour performing in a wheelchair. That year, she was voted "Favorite Motion Picture Actress" by the People's Choice Awards. After three years away from the screen, Hepburn starred in the 1978 film "Olly Olly Oxen Free". The adventure comedy was one of the biggest failures of her career—the screenwriter James Prideaux, who worked with Hepburn, later wrote that it "died at the moment of release" and referred to it as her "lost film". Hepburn claimed the main reason she had done it was the opportunity to ride in a hot-air balloon. The television movie "The Corn Is Green" (1979), which was filmed in Wales, followed. It was the last of ten films Hepburn made with George Cukor, and gained her a third Emmy nomination.

By the 1980s, Hepburn had developed a noticeable tremor, giving her a permanently shaking head. She did not work for two years, saying in a television interview, "I've had my day—let the kids scramble and sweat it out." During this period she saw the Broadway production "On Golden Pond", and was impressed by its depiction of an elderly married couple coping with the difficulties of old age. Jane Fonda had purchased the screen rights for her father, actor Henry Fonda, and Hepburn sought to play opposite him in the role of quirky Ethel Thayer. "On Golden Pond" was a success, the second-highest grossing film of 1981. It demonstrated how energetic the 74-year-old Hepburn was, as she dived fully clothed into Squam Lake and gave a lively singing performance. The movie won her a second BAFTA and a record fourth Academy Award. Homer Dickens, in his book on Hepburn, notes that it was widely considered a sentimental win, "a tribute to her enduring career."

Hepburn also returned to the stage in 1981. She received a second Tony nomination for her portrayal in "The West Side Waltz" of a septuagenarian widow with a zest for life. "Variety" observed that the role was "an obvious and entirely acceptable version of [Hepburn's] own public image." Walter Kerr of "The New York Times" wrote of Hepburn and her performance, "One mysterious thing she has learned to do is breathe unchallengeable life into lifeless lines." She hoped to make a film out of the production, but nobody purchased the rights. Hepburn's reputation as one of America's best loved actors was firmly established by this point, as she was named favorite movie actress in a survey by "People" magazine and again won the popularity award from People's Choice.

In 1984, Hepburn starred in the dark-comedy "Grace Quigley", the story of an elderly woman who enlists a hitman (Nick Nolte) to kill her. Hepburn found humor in the morbid theme, but reviews were negative and the box-office was poor. In 1985, she presented a television documentary about the life and career of Spencer Tracy. The majority of Hepburn's roles from this point were in television movies, which did not receive the critical praise of her earlier work in the medium but remained popular with audiences. With each release, Hepburn would declare it her final screen appearance, but she continued to take on new roles. She received an Emmy nomination for 1986's "Mrs. Delafield Wants to Marry", then two years later returned for the comedy "Laura Lansing Slept Here", which allowed her to act with her grandniece, Schuyler Grant.

In 1991, Hepburn released her autobiography, "Me: Stories of my Life", which topped best-seller lists for over a year. She returned to television screens in 1992 for "The Man Upstairs", co-starring Ryan O'Neal, for which she received a Golden Globe nomination. In 1994 she worked opposite Anthony Quinn in "This Can't Be Love", which was largely based on Hepburn's own life, with numerous references to her personality and career. These later roles have been described as "a fictional version of the typically feisty Kate Hepburn character" and critics have remarked that Hepburn was essentially playing herself.

Hepburn's final appearance in a theatrically released film, and her first since "Grace Quigley" ten years earlier, was "Love Affair" (1994). At 87 years old, she played a supporting role alongside Annette Bening and Warren Beatty. It was the only film of Hepburn's career, other than the cameo appearance in "Stage Door Canteen", in which she did not play a leading role. Roger Ebert noted that it was the first time she had looked frail, but that the "magnificent spirit" was still there and said her scenes "steal the show". "The New York Times" made similar observations as they reflected on the actress's final big-screen appearance, stating that "if she moved more slowly than before, in demeanor she was as game and modern as she had ever been". Hepburn filmed one final role in the television movie "One Christmas" (1994), for which she received a Screen Actors Guild Award nomination at 87 years old.

Hepburn was known for being fiercely private, and would not give interviews or talk to fans for much of her career. She distanced herself from the celebrity lifestyle, uninterested in a social scene she saw as tedious and superficial, and she wore casual clothes that went strongly against convention in an era of glamour. She rarely appeared in public, even avoiding restaurants, and once wrestled a camera out of a photographer's hand when he took a picture without asking. Despite her zeal for privacy, she enjoyed her fame, and later confessed that she would not have liked the press to ignore her completely. The protective attitude thawed as she aged; beginning with a two-hour-long interview on "The Dick Cavett Show" in 1973, Hepburn became increasingly open with the public.

Hepburn's relentless energy and enthusiasm for life is often cited in biographies, while a headstrong independence became key to her celebrity status. This self-assuredness meant she could be controlling and difficult; her friend Garson Kanin likened her to a schoolmistress, and she was famously blunt and outspoken. Katharine Houghton commented that her aunt could be "maddeningly self-righteous and bossy". Hepburn confessed to being, especially early in life, "a "me me me" person". She saw herself as having a happy nature, reasoning "I like life and I've been so lucky, why shouldn't I be happy?" A. Scott Berg knew Hepburn well in her later years, and said that while she was demanding, she retained a sense of humility and humanity.

The actress led an active private life, reportedly swimming and playing tennis every morning. In her eighties she was still playing tennis regularly, as indicated in her 1993 documentary "All About Me". She also enjoyed painting, which became a passion later in life. When questioned about politics, Hepburn told an interviewer, "I always just say be on the affirmative and liberal side. Don't be a 'no' person." The anti-Communist attitude in 1940s Hollywood prompted her to political activity, as she joined the Committee for the First Amendment. Her name was mentioned at the hearings of the House Un-American Activities Committee but Hepburn denied being a Communist sympathizer. Later in life, she openly promoted birth control and supported abortion. She described herself as a "dedicated Democrat. She practiced Albert Schweitzer's theory of "Reverence for Life", but did not believe in religion or the afterlife. In 1991, Hepburn told a journalist, "I'm an atheist, and that's it. I believe there's nothing we can know except that we should be kind to each other and do what we can for other people." Her public declarations of these beliefs led the American Humanist Association to award her the Humanist Arts Award in 1985.

Hepburn's only husband was Ludlow Ogden Smith, a socialite-businessman from Philadelphia whom she met while a student at Bryn Mawr. The couple married on December 12, 1928, when she was 21 and he was 29. Hepburn had Smith change his name to S. Ogden Ludlow so that she would not be known as "Kate Smith", which she considered too plain. She never fully committed to the marriage and prioritized her career. The move to Hollywood in 1932 cemented the couple's estrangement, and in 1934, she traveled to Mexico to get a quick divorce. Hepburn often expressed her gratitude toward Smith for his financial and moral support in the early days of her career, and in her autobiography called herself "a terrible pig" for exploiting his love. The pair remained friends until his death in 1979.

Soon after moving to California, Hepburn began a relationship with her agent, Leland Hayward, although they were both married. Hayward proposed to the actress once they had each divorced but she declined, later explaining, "I liked the idea of being my own single self." They were involved for four years. In 1936, while she was touring "Jane Eyre", Hepburn began a relationship with entrepreneur Howard Hughes. She had been introduced to him a year earlier by their mutual friend Cary Grant. Hughes wished to marry her, and the tabloids reported their impending nuptials, but Hepburn was too focused on resurrecting her failing career. They separated in 1938, when Hepburn left Hollywood after being labeled "box office poison".

Hepburn stuck to her decision not to remarry, and made a conscious choice not to have children. She believed that motherhood should be a full-time commitment, and said it was not one she was willing to make. "I would have been a terrible mother," she told Berg, "because I'm basically a very selfish human being." She felt she had partially experienced parenthood through her much younger siblings, which fulfilled any need to have children of her own. Rumors have existed since the 1930s that Hepburn may have been a lesbian or bisexual, which she often joked about. In 2007, William J. Mann released a biography of the actress in which he argued this was the case. In response to this speculation about her aunt, Katharine Houghton said, "I've never discovered any evidence whatsoever that she was a lesbian." However, in a 2017 documentary, columnist Liz Smith, who was a close friend, attested to the fact that she was.

The most significant relationship of Hepburn's life was with Spencer Tracy, her co-star in nine films. In her autobiography she wrote, "It was a unique feeling that I had for [Tracy]. I would have done anything for him." Lauren Bacall, a close friend, later wrote of how "blindingly" in love Hepburn was with the actor. The relationship has subsequently received much publicity, and it is often cited as one of Hollywood's legendary love affairs. Meeting when she was 34 and he was 41, Tracy was initially wary of Hepburn, unimpressed by her dirty fingernails and suspecting that she was a lesbian, but Hepburn said she "knew right away that I found him irresistible." Tracy remained married throughout their relationship; although he and his wife Louise had been living separate lives since the 1930s, there was never an official split and neither party pursued a divorce. Hepburn did not interfere, and never fought for marriage.

With Tracy determined to conceal the relationship with Hepburn from his wife, it had to remain private. They were careful not to be seen in public together, and maintained separate residences. Tracy was an alcoholic and was frequently depressed; Hepburn described him as "tortured", and she devoted herself to making his life easier. Reports from people who saw them together describe how Hepburn's entire demeanor changed when around Tracy. She mothered and obeyed him, and Tracy became heavily dependent on her. They often spent stretches of time apart due to their work, particularly in the 1950s when Hepburn was frequently abroad for career commitments.

Tracy's health declined significantly in the 1960s, and Hepburn took a five-year break in her career to care for him. She moved into Tracy's house for this period, and was with him when he died on June 10, 1967. Out of consideration for Tracy's family, she did not attend his funeral. It was only after Louise Tracy's death, in 1983, that Hepburn began to speak publicly about her feelings for her frequent co-star. In response to the question of why she stayed with Tracy for so long, despite the nature of their relationship, she said, "I honestly don't know. I can only say that I could never have left him." She claimed to not know how he felt about her and that they "just passed twenty-seven years together in what was to me absolute bliss."

Hepburn stated in her eighties, "I have no fear of death. Must be wonderful, like a long sleep." Her health began to deteriorate not long after her final screen appearance, and she was hospitalized in March 1993 for exhaustion. In the winter of 1996, she was hospitalized with pneumonia. By 1997, she had become very weak, was speaking and eating very little, and it was feared she would die. She showed signs of dementia in her final years. In May 2003, an aggressive tumor was found in Hepburn's neck. The decision was made not to medically intervene, and she died from a cardiac arrest on June 29, 2003, a month after her 96th birthday at the Hepburn family home in Fenwick, Connecticut. She was buried in Cedar Hill Cemetery in Hartford. Hepburn requested that there be no memorial service.

Hepburn's death received considerable public attention. Many tributes were held on television, and newspapers and magazines dedicated issues to the actress. American president George W. Bush said Hepburn "will be remembered as one of the nation's artistic treasures." In honor of her extensive theatre work, the lights of Broadway were dimmed for the evening of July 1, 2003. In 2004, in accordance with Hepburn's wishes, her belongings were put up for auction with Sotheby's in New York City. The event garnered $5.8 million, which Hepburn willed to her family.

According to reports, Hepburn was not an instinctive actor. She liked to study the text and character carefully beforehand, making sure she knew them thoroughly, and then to rehearse as much as possible and film multiple takes of a scene. With a genuine passion for acting she committed heavily to each role and insisted on learning any necessary skills and performing stunts herself. She was known to learn not only her own lines but also those of her costars. Commenting on her motivation, Stanley Kramer said, "Work, work, work. She can work till everyone drops." Hepburn involved herself in the production of each of her films, making suggestions for the script and stating her opinion on everything from costumes to lighting to camerawork.

The characters Hepburn played were, with very few exceptions, wealthy and intelligent, and often strong and independent. These tough characters tended to be humbled in some form and revealed to have a hidden vulnerability. Garson Kanin described what he called "the formula for a Hepburn success: A high-class, or stuck-up ... girl is brought down to earth by an earthy type, or a lowbrow ... or a cataclysmic situation. It seems to have worked time and time again." Due to this repeated character arc, Britton sees Hepburn as embodying the "contradictions" of the "nature and status of women", as the strong females she depicts are eventually "restored to a safe position within the status quo". Film critic Molly Haskell has commented on the importance of this to Hepburn's career: with an intimidating presence, it was necessary that her characters "do some kind of self-abasement, to stay on the good side of the audience."

Hepburn is one of the most celebrated American actresses, but she has also been criticized for a lack of versatility. Her on-screen persona closely matched her own real personality, something Hepburn admitted herself. In 1991 she told a journalist, "I think I'm always the same. I had a very definite personality and I liked material that showed that personality." Playwright and author David Macaray has said, "Picture Katharine Hepburn in every movie she ever starred in and ask yourself if she's not playing, essentially, the same part over and over ... Icon or no icon, let's not confuse a truly fascinating and unique woman with a superior actress." Another repeated criticism is that her demeanor was too cold.

Hepburn is considered an important and influential cultural figure. Ros Horton and Sally Simmons included her in their book "Women Who Changed The World", which honors 50 women who helped shape world history and culture. She is also named in "Encyclopædia Britannica's" list of "300 Women Who Changed the World", "Ladies Home Journal"'s book "100 Most Important Women of the 20th century", "Variety" magazine's "100 Icons of the Century", and she is number 84 on VH1's list of the "200 Greatest Pop Culture Icons of All Time". In 1999, the American Film Institute named Hepburn the "greatest American screen legend" among females.

Regarding Hepburn's film legacy, one of her biographers, Sheridan Morley, said she "broke the mold" for women in Hollywood, where she brought a new breed of strong-willed females to the screen. Film academic Andrew Britton wrote a monograph studying Hepburn's "key presence within classical Hollywood, a consistent, potentially radical disturbance", and pinpoints her "central" influence in bringing feminist issues to the screen. Maryann Pasda DiEdwardo has claimed that Hepburn's performances fostered a "decisiveness toward a new vision of women."

Off screen, Hepburn lived in a manner ahead of her time; she thus came to symbolize the "modern woman" and played a part in changing attitudes towards the gender. Horton and Simmons write, "Confident, intelligent and witty, four-time Oscar winner Katharine Hepburn defied convention throughout her professional and personal life ... Hepburn provided an image of an assertive woman whom [females] could watch and learn from." After Hepburn's death, film historian Jeanine Basinger stated, "What she brought us was a new kind of heroine—modern and independent. She was beautiful, but she did not rely on that." Mary McNamara, an entertainment journalist and reviewer for the "Los Angeles Times" wrote, "More than a movie star, Katharine Hepburn was the patron saint of the independent American female." She was not universally revered by feminists, however, who were angered by her public declarations that women "cannot have it all," meaning a family and a career.

Hepburn's legacy extends to fashion, where she was a pioneer for wearing trousers at a time when it was radical for a woman to do so. She contributed towards making trousers acceptable for women, as fans began to imitate her clothing. In 1986 she received a lifetime achievement award from the Council of Fashion Designers of America in recognition of the influence she played in women's fashion.
A number of Hepburn's films have become classics of American cinema, with four of her pictures ("The African Queen", "The Philadelphia Story", "Bringing Up Baby", and "Guess Who's Coming to Dinner") featured on the American Film Institute's list of the 100 Greatest American Films of all time. "Adam's Rib" and "Woman of the Year" were included in the AFI's list of the Greatest American Comedies. Her clipped, patrician voice is considered one of the most distinctive in film history. []

Hepburn has been honored with several memorials. The Turtle Bay community in Manhattan, New York City, where she maintained a residence for over 60 years, dedicated a garden in her name in 1997. After Hepburn's death in 2003, the intersection of East 49th Street and 2nd Avenue was renamed "Katharine Hepburn Place". Three years later Bryn Mawr College, Hepburn's alma mater, launched the Katharine Houghton Hepburn Center. It is dedicated to both the actress and her mother, and encourages women to address important issues affecting their gender. The center awards the annual Katharine Hepburn Medal, which "recognizes women whose lives, work and contributions embody the intelligence, drive and independence of the four-time-Oscar-winning actress" and whose award recipients "are chosen on the basis of their commitment and contributions to the Hepburn women’s greatest passions—civic engagement and the arts". The Katharine Hepburn Cultural Arts Center was opened in 2009 in Old Saybrook, Connecticut, the location of the Hepburn family beach home, which she loved and later owned. The building includes a performance space and a Katharine Hepburn museum.

The Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences library and the New York Public Library hold collections of Hepburn's personal papers. Selections from the New York collection, which documents Hepburn's theatrical career, were presented in a five-month exhibition, "Katharine Hepburn: In Her Own Files", in 2009. Other exhibitions have been held to showcase Hepburn's career. "One Life: Kate, A Centennial Celebration" was held at the National Portrait Gallery in Washington from November 2007 to September 2008. Kent State University exhibited a selection of her film and theatre costumes from October 2010 to September 2011 in "Katharine Hepburn: Dressed for Stage and Screen". Hepburn has also been honored with her own postal stamp as part of the "Legends of Hollywood" stamp series. In 2015, the British Film Institute held a two-month retrospective of Hepburn's work.

Hepburn is the subject of a one-woman play, "Tea at Five", written by Matthew Lombardo. The first act features Hepburn in 1938, after being labeled "box office poison", and the second act in 1983, where she reflects on her life and career. It was first performed in 2002 at the Hartford Stage. Hepburn has been portrayed in "Tea at Five" by Kate Mulgrew, Tovah Feldshuh, Stephanie Zimbalist, and Charles Busch. Feldshuh also appeared as Hepburn in "The Amazing Howard Hughes", a 1977 television movie, while Mearle Ann Taylor later portrayed her in "The Scarlett O'Hara War" (1980). In Martin Scorsese's 2004 biopic of Howard Hughes, "The Aviator", Hepburn was portrayed by Cate Blanchett, who won the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress for her performance. This marked the first instance where the portrayal of an Academy Award-winning actress was turned into an Academy Award-winning role.

In 2014, two Hepburn biopics were announced to be in development. The first deals with her relationship with Spencer Tracy, and the second covers her early years in Hollywood (based on William Mann's account).

Hepburn won four Academy Awards, the record number for a performer, and a total of 12 Oscar nominations for Best Actress—a number surpassed only by Meryl Streep. Hepburn also holds the record for the longest time span between first and last Oscar nominations, at 48 years. She received two awards and five nominations from the British Academy Film Awards, one award and six nominations from the Emmy Awards, eight Golden Globe nominations, two Tony Award nominations, and awards from the Cannes Film Festival, Venice Film Festival, the New York Film Critics Circle Awards, the People's Choice Awards, and others. Hepburn was inducted into the American Theater Hall of Fame in 1979. She also won a Lifetime Achievement Award from the Screen Actors Guild in 1979 and received the Kennedy Center Honors, which recognize a lifetime of accomplishments in the arts, in 1990.

Hepburn was recognized by the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences for the following performances:

During her 66-year career, Hepburn appeared in 44 feature films, 8 television movies, and 33 plays. Her movie career covered a range of genres, including screwball comedies, period dramas, and adaptations of works by top American playwrights. She appeared on the stage in every decade from the 1920s to the 1980s, performing plays by Shakespeare and Shaw, and a Broadway musical.

Select filmography:

Select theatre roles:


</doc>
<doc id="18717883" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18717883" title="Jodie Foster">
Jodie Foster

Alicia Christian "Jodie" Foster (born November 19, 1962) is an American actress, director, and producer. Foster began her professional career as a child model when she was three years old in 1965, and two years later she moved to acting in television series, when she debuted the sitcom "Mayberry R.F.D.". In the late 1960s and early 1970s, she worked in several primetime television series and starred in children's films. Foster's breakthrough came in Martin Scorsese's "Taxi Driver" (1976), in which she played a teenage prostitute; the role garnered her a nomination for an Academy Award. Her other critically acclaimed roles as a teenager were in the musical "Bugsy Malone" (1976) and the thriller "The Little Girl Who Lives Down the Lane" (1976), and she became a popular teen idol by starring in Disney's "Freaky Friday" (1976), "Candleshoe" (1977), and "Foxes" (1980).

After attending college at Yale, Foster struggled in her transition to adult roles until she won widespread critical acclaim for her portrayal of a rape survivor in "The Accused" (1988), for which she won several awards, including an Academy Award and a Golden Globe. She won her second Academy Award three years later for her role in the sleeper hit "The Silence of the Lambs", where she played Clarice Starling, an FBI trainee investigating a serial murder case. Foster made her debut as a film director the same year with the moderately successful "Little Man Tate" (1991), and founded her own production company, Egg Pictures, in 1992. The company's first production was "Nell" (1994), in which she also played the title role, gaining another nomination for an Academy Award. Her other films in the 1990s included period drama "Sommersby", Western comedy "Maverick" (1994), science fiction film "Contact" (1997), and period drama "Anna and the King" (1999). Her second film direction, "Home for the Holidays" (1995), was not well-received commercially, while critical reviews were mixed.

Foster experienced career setbacks in the early 2000s that included the cancellation of a film project and the closing down of her production company. She then starred in four thrillers, "Panic Room" (2002), "Flightplan" (2005), "Inside Man" (2006) and "The Brave One" (2007), which were commercially successful and generally well-received by critics and audiences. She has focused on directing in the 2010s, directing the films "The Beaver" (2011) and "Money Monster" (2016), as well as episodes for Netflix television series "Orange is the New Black", "House of Cards", and "Black Mirror". She also starred in the films "Carnage" (2011) and "Elysium" (2013). 

Foster has often been cited as one of the best actresses of her generation. In addition to her two Academy Awards, Foster has won three BAFTA Awards, three Golden Globe Awards, a Screen Actors Guild Award and the Cecil B DeMille Award. For her work as a director, Foster has been nominated for two Directors Guild of America Awards and a Primetime Emmy Award. 

Foster was born on November 19, 1962 in Los Angeles, the youngest child of Evelyn Ella "Brandy" (née Almond) and Lucius Fisher Foster III. Her father came from a wealthy Chicago family, whose forebears included John Alden, who had arrived in North America on the "Mayflower" in 1620. He was a Yale University graduate and a decorated U.S. Air Force lieutenant colonel, and made his career as a real estate broker. He had already been married once and had three sons from the union before marrying Brandy in Las Vegas in 1953. Brandy Foster was of German heritage and grew up in Rockford, Illinois. Foster also has Irish roots, with ancestry that can be traced back to County Cork. Before Foster's birth, she and Lucius had three other children: daughters Lucinda "Cindy" Foster (b. 1954) and Constance "Connie" Foster (b. 1955), and son Lucius Fisher "Buddy" Foster (b. 1957). Their marriage ended before Foster was born, and she never established a relationship with her father. Following the divorce, Brandy raised the children with her partner in Los Angeles. She worked as a publicist for film producer Arthur P. Jacobs, until focusing on managing the acting careers of Buddy and Jodie. Although Foster was officially named Alicia, her siblings began calling her "Jodie", and the name stuck.
Foster was a gifted child who learned to read at the age of three. She attended a French-language prep school, the Lycée Français de Los Angeles. Her fluency in French has enabled her to act in French films, and she also dubs herself in French-language versions of most of her English-language films. She also understands Italian although does not speak it, as well as a little Spanish and German. Already a successful actor, Foster attended Yale University in New Haven, Connecticut. She majored in literature, writing her thesis on Toni Morrison, and graduated "magna cum laude" in 1985. At her graduation in 1980, she delivered the valedictory address for the school's French division.. She returned to Yale in 1993 to address the graduating class, and was awarded an honorary Doctor of Fine Arts degree in 1997.

Foster's career began with an appearance as the Coppertone girl in a television advertisement in 1965, when she was only three years old. Her mother had originally intended only for her older brother Buddy to audition for the ad, but had taken Jodie with them to the casting call, where she was noticed by the casting agents. The television spot led to more advertisement work, and in 1968 to a minor appearance in the sitcom "Mayberry R.F.D.", in which her brother starred. In the following years Foster continued working in advertisements and appeared in over fifty television shows; she and her brother became the breadwinners of the family during this time. Although most of Foster's television appearances were minor, she had recurring roles in "The Courtship of Eddie's Father" (1969–1971) and "Bob & Carol & Ted & Alice" (1973), and starred opposite Christopher Connelly in the short-lived "Paper Moon" (1974), adapted from the hit film.

Foster also appeared in films, mostly for Disney. After a role in the television film "Menace on the Mountain" (1970), she made her feature film debut in "Napoleon and Samantha" (1972), playing a girl who becomes friends with a boy, played by Johnny Whitaker, and his pet lion. She was accidentally grabbed by the lion on set, which left her with permanent scars on her back. Her other early film work includes the Raquel Welch vehicle "Kansas City Bomber" (1972), the Western "One Little Indian" (1973), the Mark Twain adaptation "Tom Sawyer" (1973), and Martin Scorsese's "Alice Doesn't Live Here Anymore" (1974), in which she appeared in a supporting role as a "Ripple-drinking street kid".

Foster has said she loved acting as a child, and values her early work for the experience it gave her: "Some people get quick breaks and declare, 'I'll never do commercials! That's so lowbrow!' I want to tell them, 'Well, I'm real glad you've got a pretty face, because I worked for 20 years doing that stuff and I feel it's really invaluable; it really taught me a lot.'"

Foster's mother was concerned that her daughter's career would end by the time she grew out of playing children, and decided that to ensure continued work and to gain greater recognition, Foster should also begin acting in films for adult audiences. After the minor supporting role in "Alice", Martin Scorsese cast her in the role of a teenage prostitute in "Taxi Driver" (1976). The Los Angeles Welfare Board initially opposed twelve-year-old Foster's appearing in the film due to its violent content, but relented after governor Pat Brown intervened and a UCLA psychiatrist assessed her. A social worker was required to accompany her on set and her older sister Connie acted as her stand-in in sexually suggestive scenes. Foster later commented on the controversy saying that she hated "the idea that everybody thinks if a kid's going to be an actress it means that she has to play Shirley Temple or someone's little sister."

During the filming, Foster developed a close bond with co-star Robert DeNiro, who saw "serious potential" in her and dedicated time outside of filming on rehearsing scenes with her. She described "Taxi Driver" as a life-changing experience and stated that it was "the first time anyone asked me to create a character that wasn't myself. It was the first time I realized that acting wasn't this hobby you just sort of did, but that there was actually some craft." Released in February, it won the Palme d'Or at the Cannes Film Festival in May; Foster also impressed journalists when she acted as French interpreter at the film's press conference. "Taxi Driver" was a critical and commercial success, and earned her a supporting actress Academy Award nomination, as well as two BAFTAs, a David di Donatello and a National Society of Film Critics award. The film is considered one of the best films ever made by both the American Film Institute and "Sight & Sound", and has been preserved in the National Film Registry.
Foster also acted in another film nominated for the Palme d'Or in 1976, "Bugsy Malone". The British musical parodied films about Prohibition Era gangsters by having all roles played by children; Foster appeared in a major supporting role as a star of a speakeasy show. Its director Alan Parker was impressed by her, saying that "she takes such an intelligent interest in the way the film is being made that if I had been run over by a bus I think she was probably the only person on the set able to take over as director." She gained several positive notices for her performance: Roger Ebert of the "Chicago Sun-Times" stated that "at thirteen she was already getting the roles that grown-up actresses complained weren't being written for women anymore", "Variety" described her as "outstanding", and Vincent Canby of "The New York Times" called her "the star of the show". Foster's two BAFTAs were awarded jointly for her performances in "Taxi Driver" and "Bugsy Malone". Her third film release in spring 1976 was the independent drama "Echoes of a Summer", which had been filmed two years previously. "The New York Times" named Foster's performance as a terminally ill girl the film's "main strength" and Gene Siskel of the "Chicago Tribune" stated that she "is not a good child actress; she's just a good actress", although both reviewers otherwise panned the film.

Foster's fourth film of 1976 was the Canadian-French thriller "The Little Girl Who Lives Down the Lane", in which she starred opposite Martin Sheen. The film combined aspects from thriller and horror genres, and showed Foster as a mysterious young girl living on her own in a small town; the performance earned her a Saturn Award. On November 27, she hosted "Saturday Night Live", becoming the youngest person to do so until 1982. Her final film of the year was "Freaky Friday", a Disney comedy commenting on the generation gap, which was "her first true star vehicle". She played a tomboy teen who accidentally changes bodies with her mother; she later stated that her character's desire to become an adult was matched by her own feelings at the time, and that the film marked a "transitional period" for her when she began to grow out of child roles. It received mainly positive reviews, and was a box office success, gaining Foster a Golden Globe nomination for her performance.

After her breakthrough year, Foster spent nine months living in France, where she starred in "Moi, fleur bleue" (1977) and recorded several songs for its soundtrack. Her other films released in 1977 were the Italian comedy "Casotto" (1977), and the Disney heist film "Candleshoe" (1977), which was filmed in England and co-starred veteran actors David Niven and Helen Hayes. After its release, Foster did not appear in any new releases until 1980, the year she turned eighteen. She gained positive notices for her performances in Adrian Lyne's debut feature film "Foxes" (1980), which focuses on the lives of Los Angeles teenagers, and "Carny" (1980), in which she played a waitress who runs away from her former life by joining a touring carnival.

Aware that child stars are often unable to successfully continue their careers into adulthood, Foster became a full-time student at Yale in fall 1980, and her acting career slowed down in the following five years. She later stated that going to college was "a wonderful time of self-discovery", and changed her thoughts about acting, which she had previously thought was an unintelligent profession, but now realised that "what I really wanted to do was to act and there was nothing stupid about it." She continued making films on her summer vacations, and during her college years appeared in "O'Hara's Wife" (1982), television film "Svengali" (1983), John Irving adaptation "The Hotel New Hampshire" (1984), French film "The Blood of Others" (1984), and period drama "Mesmerized" (1986), which she also co-produced. None of them were however successful, and Foster struggled to find work after graduating in 1985. The neo-noir "Siesta" (1987), in which she appeared in a supporting role, was a failure. "Five Corners" (1987) was a moderate critical success and earned Foster an Independent Spirit Award for her performance as a woman whose sexual assaulter returns to stalk her. In 1988, Foster made her debut as a director with the episode "Do Not Open This Box" for the horror anthology series "Tales from the Darkside", and in August appeared in the romantic drama "Stealing Home" (1988) opposite Mark Harmon. It was a flop, with film critic Roger Ebert even "wondering if any movie could possibly be that bad".

Foster's breakthrough into adult roles came with her performance as a rape survivor in "The Accused", a drama based on a real criminal case, which was released in October 1988. The film focuses on the aftermath of a gang rape and its survivor's fight for justice in the face of victim blaming. Before making the film, Foster was having doubts about whether to continue her career and planned on starting graduate studies, but decided to give acting "one last try" in "The Accused". She had to audition twice for the role and was cast only after several more established actors had turned it down, as the film's producers were wary of her due to her previous failures and because she was still remembered as a "chubby teenager". Due to the heavy subject matter, the filming was a difficult experience for all cast and crew involved, especially the shooting of the rape scene, which took five days to complete. Foster was initially unhappy with her performance, and feared that it would end her career. Her fears turned out to be unfounded: although "The Accused" received overall mixed reviews upon its release, Foster's performance was positively received by the critics and earned her Academy, Golden Globe and National Board of Review awards, as well as a nomination for a BAFTA Award.

Foster's first film release after the success of "The Accused" was the thriller "The Silence of the Lambs" (1991). She played FBI trainee Clarice Starling, who is sent to interview incarcerated serial killer Hannibal Lecter (Anthony Hopkins) in order to solve another serial murder case; Foster later named the role one of her favorites. She had read the novel it was based on after its publication in 1988 and had attempted to purchase its film rights, as it featured "a real female heroine" and its plot was not "about steroids and brawn, [but] about using your mind and using your insufficiencies to combat the villain." Despite her enthusiasm, director Jonathan Demme did not initially want to cast her, but the producers overruled him. Demme's view of Foster changed during the production, and he later credited her for helping him define the character.

Released in February 1991, "Silence of the Lambs" became one of the biggest hits of the year, grossing close to $273 million, with a positive critical reception. Foster received largely favorable reviews and won Academy, Golden Globe, and BAFTA awards for her portrayal of Starling; "Silence" won five Academy Awards overall, becoming one of the few films to win in all main categories. In contrast, some reviewers criticized the film as misogynist for its focus on brutal murders of women, and blamed it for homophobia due to its main villain, serial killer "Buffalo Bill". Much of the criticism was directed towards Foster, whom the critics alleged was herself a lesbian. Despite the controversy, the film is considered a modern classic: Starling and Lecter are included on the American Film Institute's top ten of the greatest film heroes and villains, and the film is preserved in the National Film Registry. Later in 1991, Foster also starred in the unsuccessful low-budget thriller "Catchfire", which had been filmed before "Silence", but was released after it in an attempt to profit from its success.

In October 1991, Foster released her first feature film as a director, "Little Man Tate", a drama about a child prodigy who struggles to come to terms with being different. The main role was played by previously unknown actor Adam Hann-Byrd, and Foster co-starred as his working-class single mother. She had found the script from the "slush pile" at Orion Pictures, and explained that for her debut film she "wanted a piece that was not autobiographical, but that had to do with the 10 philosophies I've accumulated in the past 25 years. Every single one of them, if they weren't in the script from the beginning, they're there now." Although she was publicly lauded for her choice to become a director, many reviewers felt that the film itself did not live up to the high expectations, and regarded it as "less adventurous than many films in which [she] had starred". Regardless, it was a moderate box office success. Foster's final film appearance of the year came in a small role as a prostitute in "Shadows and Fog" (1991), directed by Woody Allen, with whom she had wanted to collaborate since the 1970s.

The following year, Foster founded her own production company, Egg Pictures, a subsidiary of PolyGram Filmed Entertainment. She was to produce up to six films, each with the budget of $10–25 million, in the following three years. Her next films were a romantic period film and a comedy, and according to film scholar Karen Hollinger, featured her in more "conventionally feminine" roles. She starred opposite Richard Gere in "Sommersby" (1993), portraying a woman who begins to suspect that her husband who returns home from the Civil War is in fact an impostor. She then replaced Meg Ryan in the Western comedy "Maverick" (1994), playing a con artist opposite Mel Gibson and James Garner. Both films were box office hits, earning over $140 and $183 million respectively. Foster's first project for Egg Pictures, "Nell", was released in December 1994. In addition to acting as its producer, she starred in the title role as a woman who grew up isolated in the Appalachian Mountains and speaks her own language as her only human connection has been her disabled mother. It was based on Mark Handley's play "Idioglossia", which interested Foster for its theme of "otherness", and because she "loved this idea of a woman who defies categorization, a creature who is labeled and categorized by people based on their own problems and their own prejudices and what they bring to the table." It was a moderate commercial success, but a critical disappointment. Despite the negative reviews, Foster received a Screen Actors Guild Award for her performance and was nominated for an Academy Award and a Golden Globe.

The second film that Foster directed was "Home for the Holidays", released in 1995. It starred Holly Hunter and Robert Downey Jr. and was described as a black comedy "set around a nightmarish Thanksgiving". Released in November 1995, it was a critical and commercial failure. The following year, Foster received two honorary awards: the Crystal Award, awarded annually for women in the entertainment industry, and the Berlinale Camera at the 46th Berlin International Film Festival. After "Nell" in 1994, Foster did not act in any new projects until 1997, aside from voicing characters in episodes of "Frasier" in 1996 and "The X-Files" in early 1997. She was in talks to star in David Fincher's thriller "The Game", but its production company, Polygram, dropped her from the project after disagreements over her role. Foster sued the company, saying that she had an oral agreement with them to star in the film and had as a result taken "herself off the market" and lost out on other film projects. The case was later settled out of court. Foster finally made her return to the big screen in "Contact" (1997), a science fiction film based on a novel by Carl Sagan and directed by Robert Zemeckis. She starred as a scientist searching for extraterrestrial life in the SETI project. Due to the special effects, many of the scenes were filmed with a bluescreen; this was Foster's first experience with the technology. She commented, "Blue walls, blue roof. It was just blue, blue, blue. And I was rotated on a lazy Susan with the camera moving on a computerized arm. It was really tough." The film was a commercial success and earned Foster a Saturn Award and a nomination for a Golden Globe. She also had an asteroid, 17744 Jodiefoster, named in her honor in 1998.

Foster's next project was producing Jane Anderson's television film "The Baby Dance" (1998) for Showtime. Its story deals with a wealthy California couple who struggle with infertility and decide to adopt from a poor family in Louisiana. On her decision to produce for television, Foster stated that it was easier to take financial risks in that medium than in feature films. In 1998, she also moved her production company from PolyGram to Paramount Pictures. Foster's last film of the 1990s was the period drama "Anna and the King" (1999), in which she starred opposite Chow Yun-Fat. It was based on a fictionalized biography of British teacher Anna Leonowens, who taught the children of King Mongkut of Siam, and whose story became well known as the musical "The King and I". Foster was paid $15 million to portray Leonowens, making her one of the highest-paid female actors in Hollywood. The film was subject to controversy when the Thai government deemed it historically inaccurate and insulting to the royal family and banned its distribution in the country. It was a moderate commercial success, but received mixed to negative reviews. Roger Ebert panned the film, stating that the role required Foster "to play beneath [her] intelligence" and "The New York Times" called it a "misstep" for her and accused her of only being "interested ... in sanctifying herself as an old-fashioned heroine than in taking on dramatically risky roles".

Foster's first project of the new decade was Keith Gordon's film "Waking the Dead" (2000), which she produced. She declined to reprise her role as Clarice Starling in "Hannibal" (2001), with the part going instead to Julianne Moore, and concentrated on a new directorial project, "Flora Plum". It was to focus on a 1930s circus and star Claire Danes and Russell Crowe, but had to be shelved after Crowe was injured on set and could not complete filming on schedule; Foster unsuccessfully attempted to revive the project several times in the following years. Controversially, she also expressed interest in directing and starring in a biopic of Nazi film director Leni Riefenstahl, who did not like the idea. In addition to these setbacks, Foster shut down Egg Pictures in 2001, stating that producing was "just a really thankless, bad job". The company's last production, "The Dangerous Lives of Altar Boys", premiered at the Sundance Film Festival in January 2002. It received good reviews, and had a limited theatrical release in the summer.

After the cancellation of "Flora Plum", Foster took on the main role in David Fincher's thriller "Panic Room" after its intended star, Nicole Kidman, had to drop out due to an injury on set. Before filming resumed, Foster was given only a week to prepare for the role of a woman who moves with her daughter to a house fitted with a panic room, which they have to use on their first night due to a home invasion. It grossed over $30 million on its North American opening weekend in March 2002, thus becoming the most successful film opening of Foster's career as of 2015. In addition to being a box office success, the film also received largely positive reviews.

After a minor appearance in the French period drama "A Very Long Engagement" (2004), Foster starred in three more thrillers. The first was "Flightplan" (2005), in which she played a woman whose daughter vanishes during an overnight flight. It became a global box office success, but received mainly negative reviews. It was followed by Spike Lee's critically and commercially successful "Inside Man" (2006), about a bank heist on Wall Street, which co-starred Denzel Washington and Clive Owen. The third thriller, "The Brave One" (2007), prompted some comparisons to "Taxi Driver", as Foster played a New Yorker who becomes a vigilante after being seriously injured and losing her fiancé and dog in a random street attack. It was not a success, but earned Foster her sixth Golden Globe nomination. Her last film role of the decade was in the children's adventure film "Nim's Island" (2008), in which she portrayed an agoraphobic writer opposite Gerard Butler and Abigail Breslin. It was the first comedy that she had starred in since "Maverick" (1994), and was a commercial success but a critical failure. In 2009, she provided the voice for Maggie in a tetralogy episode of "The Simpsons" titled "Four Great Women and a Manicure".

In the 2010s, Foster has focused on directing and taken fewer acting roles. In February 2011, she hosted the 36th César Awards in France, and the following month released her third feature film direction, "The Beaver" (2011), about a depressed man who develops an alternative personality based on a beaver hand puppet. It starred "Maverick" co-star Mel Gibson and featured herself, Anton Yelchin and Jennifer Lawrence in supporting roles as his family. Foster called its production "probably the biggest struggle of my professional career", partly due to the film's heavy subject matter but also due to the controversy that developed around Gibson as he was accused of domestic violence and making anti-semitic, racist, and sexist statements. The film received mixed reviews, and failed the box office, largely due to the controversy surrounding its star. In 2011, Foster also appeared as part of an ensemble cast with John C. Reilly, Kate Winslet and Christoph Waltz in Roman Polanski's comedy "Carnage", focusing on middle class parents whose meeting to settle an incident between their sons descends into chaos. It premiered at the 68th Venice International Film Festival in September 2011 to mainly positive reviews and earned Foster a Golden Globe for Best Actress nomination.

In January 2013, Foster received the honorary Cecil B. DeMille Award at the 70th Golden Globe Awards. Her next film role was playing Secretary of Defense Delacourt opposite Matt Damon in the dystopian film "Elysium" (2013), which was a box office success. She also returned to television directing for the first time since the 1980s, directing the episodes "Lesbian Request Denied" (2013) and "Thirsty Bird" (2014) for "Orange Is the New Black", the episode "Chapter 22" (2014) for "House of Cards". and the second episode of the fourth season "Arkangel" for "Black Mirror". "Lesbian Request Denied" brought her a Primetime Emmy Award nomination, and the two 2014 episodes earned her two nominations for a Directors Guild of America Award. In 2014, she also narrated the episode "Women in Space" for "", a PBS documentary series about women's struggle for equal rights in the United States. The following year, Foster received the Laura Ziskin Lifetime Achievement Award at the Athena Film Festival, and directed her next film, "Money Monster", which stars George Clooney and Julia Roberts, and was released in May 2016.

In interviews, Foster rarely talks about her private life, and she has explained that she "values privacy against all else" due to having spent most of her life in the public eye. She lives in Los Angeles, and had two sons, Charles "Charlie" Foster (b. 1998) and Christopher "Kit" Foster (b. 2001), while partnered with Cydney Bernard. She met Bernard on the set of "Sommersby" (1993) and was in a relationship with her from 1993 to 2008. In April 2014, Foster married actress and photographer Alexandra Hedison. She stated in 2011 that having children has made her take on fewer projects: "It is a big sacrifice to leave home. I want to make sure that I feel passionate about the movies I do because it is a big sacrifice... Even if you take the average movie shoot of four months – you have three weeks' prep, press duties here and abroad, dubbing and looping, magazine covers, events and premieres – that's eight months out of a year. That's a long time. If you do two movies back-to-back, you're never going to see your children."

Foster's sexual orientation became subject to public discussion in 1991, when activists protesting the alleged homophobia in "The Silence of the Lambs" (1991) claimed that she was a closeted lesbian in articles in publications such as "OutWeek" and "The Village Voice". While she had been in a relationship with Bernard for a long time, Foster first publicly acknowledged it in a speech at "The Hollywood Reporter's" "Women in Entertainment" breakfast honoring her in 2007. In 2013, she addressed coming out in a speech after receiving the Cecil B. DeMille Award at the 70th Golden Globe Awards, which led many news outlets to afterwards describe her as lesbian or gay, although some sources noted that she did not use the words "gay" or "lesbian" in her speech.

Foster is an atheist but has said it is important to teach children about different religions, stating that "in my home, we ritualize all of them. We do Christmas. We do Shabbat on Fridays. We love Kwanzaa. I take pains to give my family a real religious basis, a knowledge, because it's being well educated. You need to know why all those wars were fought." She also supports gun control.

During her freshman year at Yale in 1980–1981, Foster was stalked by John W. Hinckley, Jr., who had developed an obsession with her after watching "Taxi Driver". He moved to New Haven and tried to contact her, both through letters and by phone. On March 30, 1981, Hinckley attempted to assassinate U.S. President Ronald Reagan, wounding him and three other people, claiming that his motive was to impress Foster. The incident made her subject to intense media attention, and she had to be accompanied by bodyguards while she was on campus. Although Judge Barrington D. Parker confirmed that Foster was wholly innocent in the case and had been "unwittingly ensnared in a third party's alleged attempt to assassinate an American President", she was required to give a videotaped testimony, which was played at the trial. During her time at Yale, Foster also had other stalkers, including Edward Richardson, who initially planned to murder her but changed his mind after watching her perform in a college play.

The experience was difficult for Foster, and she has rarely commented publicly about it. In the aftermath of the events, she wrote an essay titled "Why Me?", which was published in 1992 by "Esquire" on the condition that "there be no cover lines, no publicity and no photos". In 1991, she cancelled an interview with NBC's "Today Show" when she discovered Hinckley would be mentioned in the introduction, and the producers were unwilling to change it. She discussed Hinckley with Charlie Rose of "60 Minutes II" in 1999, explaining that she does not "like to dwell on it too much [...] I never wanted to be the actress who was remembered for that event. Because it didn't have anything to do with me. I was kind of a hapless bystander. But [...] what a scarring, strange moment in history for me, to be 17 years old, 18 years old, and to be caught up in a drama like that." She stated that the incident had a major impact on career choices she made but acknowledged that as difficult as the ordeal was for her, it was minimal compared to the suffering of Reagan's press secretary James Brady, who was permanently disabled in the shooting and died as a result of his injuries 33 years later, and his loved ones: "whatever bad moments that I had certainly could never compare to that family".





</doc>
<doc id="44463" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44463" title="Sophia Loren">
Sophia Loren

Sofia Costanza Brigida Villani Scicolone (), known as Sophia Loren, Dama di Gran Croce OMRI (; ; born 20 September 1934) is an Italian film actress and singer. Encouraged to enroll in acting lessons after entering a beauty pageant, Loren began her film career in 1950 at age 15. She appeared in several bit parts and minor roles in the early part of the decade, until her five-picture contract with Paramount in 1956 launched her international career. Notable film appearances around this time include "The Pride and the Passion", "Houseboat", and "It Started in Naples".

Her talents as an actress were not recognized until her performance as Cesira in Vittorio De Sica's "Two Women"; Loren's performance earned her the Academy Award for Best Actress in 1962 and made her the first actress to win an Oscar for a foreign-language performance. She holds the record for having earned six David di Donatello Awards for Best Actress: "Two Women"; "Yesterday, Today and Tomorrow"; "Marriage Italian Style" (for which she was nominated for a second Oscar); "Sunflower"; "The Voyage"; and "A Special Day". After starting a family in the early 1970s, Loren chose to make only occasional film appearances. In later years, she has appeared in American films such as "Grumpier Old Men" and "Nine".

Aside from the Academy Award, she has won a Grammy Award, five special Golden Globes, a BAFTA Award, a Laurel Award, the Volpi Cup for Best Actress at the Venice Film Festival, the Best Actress Award at the Cannes Film Festival, and the Honorary Academy Award in 1991. In 1995, she received the Cecil B. DeMille Award for lifetime achievements, one of many such awards. In 1999, Loren was acknowledged as No. 21 of the top 25 female American screen legends in the American Film Institute's survey, AFI's 100 Years...100 Stars, and she is currently the only living actress on the list.

On December 21, 2017 Sophia Loren was named the Godmother of all newly built MSC cruise liners.

Loren was born Sofia Villani Scicolone in the Clinica Regina Margherita in Rome, Italy, the daughter of Romilda Villani (1910–1991) and Riccardo Scicolone, a construction engineer of noble descent (Loren wrote in her autobiography that she is entitled to call herself Marchesa di Licata Scicolone Murillo). Riccardo Scicolone refused to marry Villani, leaving the piano teacher and aspiring actress without support. Loren's parents had another child together, her sister Maria, in 1938. Loren has two younger paternal half-brothers, Giuliano and Giuseppe. Romilda, Sofia, and Maria lived with Loren's grandmother in Pozzuoli, near Naples.

During World War II, the harbour and munitions plant in Pozzuoli was a frequent bombing target of the Allies. During one raid, as Loren ran to the shelter, she was struck by shrapnel and wounded in the chin. After that, the family moved to Naples, where they were taken in by distant relatives. After the war, Loren and her family returned to Pozzuoli. Loren's grandmother Luisa opened a pub in their living room, selling homemade cherry liquor. Romilda Villani played the piano, Maria sang, and Loren waited on tables and washed dishes. The place was popular with the American GIs stationed nearby.

When she was 14, Sofia entered a beauty pageant, Miss Italia 1950 and, while she did not win, was selected as one of the finalists. Later, she enrolled in acting class and was selected as an uncredited extra in Mervyn LeRoy's film "Quo Vadis" (1951), at the age of 15. 
In 1951, she also appeared in Italian film "Era lui... sì! sì!" where she played an odalisque, being credited professionally as Sofia Lazzaro. She appeared in several bit parts and minor roles in the early part of the decade. She began using her current stage name in "La Favorita" (1952), the new name being a twist on the name of the Swedish actress Märta Torén and was suggested by Goffredo Lombardo or (according to the 2008 DVD) Carlo Ponti. Her first starring role was in "Aida" (1953), for which she received critical acclaim. After playing the lead role in "Two Nights with Cleopatra" (1953), her breakthrough role was in "The Gold of Naples" (1954), directed by Vittorio De Sica. "Too Bad She's Bad", also released in 1954, and (La Bella Mugnaia) (1955) became the first of many films in which Loren co-starred with Marcello Mastroianni. Over the next three years, she acted in many films, including "Scandal in Sorrento", "Lucky to Be a Woman", "Boy on a Dolphin", "Legend of the Lost" and "The Pride and the Passion".

Loren became an international film star following her five-picture contract with Paramount Pictures in 1958. Among her films at this time were "Desire Under the Elms" with Anthony Perkins, based upon the Eugene O'Neill play; "Houseboat", a romantic comedy co-starring Cary Grant; and George Cukor's "Heller in Pink Tights", in which she appeared as a blonde for the first time.
In 1960, she starred in Vittorio De Sica's "Two Women", a stark, gritty story of a mother who is trying to protect her 12-year-old daughter in war-torn Italy. The two end up gang-raped inside a church as they travel back to their home city following cessation of bombings there. Originally cast as the daughter, Loren fought against type and was recast as the mother (actress Eleonora Brown would portray the daughter). Loren's performance earned her many awards, including the Cannes Film Festival's best performance prize, and an Academy Award for Best Actress, the first major Academy Award for a non-English-language performance and to an Italian actress. She won 22 international awards for "Two Women". The film proved to be extremely well accepted by the critics and it was a huge commercial success. 

During the 1960s, Loren was one of the most popular actresses in the world, and she continued to make films in the United States and Europe, starring with prominent leading men. In 1964, her career reached its pinnacle when she received $1 million to appear in "The Fall of the Roman Empire". In 1965, she received a second Academy Award nomination for her performance in "Marriage Italian-Style". 
Among Loren's best-known films of this period are Samuel Bronston's epic production of "El Cid" (1961) with Charlton Heston, "The Millionairess" (1960) with Peter Sellers, "It Started in Naples" (1960) with Clark Gable, Vittorio De Sica's triptych "Yesterday, Today and Tomorrow" (1963) with Marcello Mastroianni, Peter Ustinov's "Lady L" (1965) with Paul Newman, the 1966 classic "Arabesque" with Gregory Peck, and Charlie Chaplin's final film, "A Countess from Hong Kong" (1967) with Marlon Brando.

Loren received four Golden Globe Awards between 1964 and 1977 as "World Film Favorite – Female".

Loren worked less after becoming a mother. During the next decade, most of her roles were in Italian features. During the 1970s, she was paired with Richard Burton in the last De Sica-directed film, "The Voyage" (1974), and a remake of the film "Brief Encounter" (1974). The film had its premiere on US television on 12 November 1974 as part of the "Hallmark Hall of Fame" series on NBC. In 1976, she starred in "The Cassandra Crossing". It fared extremely well internationally, and was a respectable box office success in US market. She co-starred with Marcello Mastroianni in Ettore Scola's "A Special Day" (1977). This movie was nominated for 11 international awards such as two Oscars (best actor in leading role, best foreign picture). It won a Golden Globe Award and a César Award for best foreign movie. Loren's performance was awarded with a David di Donatello Award, the seventh in her career. The movie was extremely well received by American reviewers and became a box office hit.

Following this success, Loren starred in an American thriller "Brass Target". This movie received mixed reviews, although it was moderately successful in the United States and internationally. In 1978, she won her fourth Golden Globe for "world film favorite". Other movies of this decade were Academy award nominee "Sunflower" (1970), which was a critical success and Arthur Hiller's "Man of La Mancha" (1972), which was a critical and commercial failure despite being nominated for several awards including two Golden Globes Awards. O'Toole and James Coco were nominated for two NBR awards, in addition the NBR listed "Man of La Mancha" in its best ten pictures of 1972 list.

In 1980, after the international success of the biography "Sophia Loren: Living and Loving, Her Own Story" by A. Hotchner, Loren portrayed herself and her mother in a made-for-television biopic adaptation of her autobiography, "Sophia Loren: Her Own Story". Ritza Brown and Chiara Ferrari each portrayed the younger Loren. In 1981, she became the first female celebrity to launch her own perfume, 'Sophia', and a brand of eyewear soon followed.

In 1982, while in Italy, she made headlines after serving an 18-day prison sentence on tax evasion charges – a fact that failed to hamper her popularity or career. In fact, Bill Moore, then employed at Pickle Packers International advertising department, sent her a pink pickle-shaped trophy for being "the prettiest lady in the prettiest pickle". In 2013, the supreme court of Italy cleared her of the charges.

She acted infrequently during the 1980s and turned down the role of Alexis Carrington in 1981 for the television series "Dynasty". Although she was set to star in 13 episodes of CBS's "Falcon Crest" in 1984 as Angela Channing's half-sister Francesca Gioberti, negotiations fell through at the last moment and the role went to Gina Lollobrigida, instead. Sophia preferred devoting more time to raising her sons.

Loren has recorded more than two dozen songs throughout her career, including a best-selling album of comedic songs with Peter Sellers; reportedly, she had to fend off his romantic advances. Partly owing to Sellers's infatuation with Loren, he split with his first wife, Anne Howe. Loren has made it clear to numerous biographers that Sellers's affections were reciprocated only platonically. This collaboration was covered in "The Life and Death of Peter Sellers" where actress Sonia Aquino portrayed Loren. The song "Where Do You Go To (My Lovely)?" by Peter Sarstedt was said to have been inspired by Loren.

In 1991, Loren received the Academy Honorary Award for her contributions to world cinema and was declared "one of the world cinema's treasures". In 1995, she received the Golden Globe Cecil B. DeMille Award.

She presented Federico Fellini with his honorary Oscar in April 1993. In 2009, Loren stated on "Larry King Live" that Fellini had planned to direct her in a film shortly before his death in 1993. Throughout the 1990s and 2000s, Loren was selective about choosing her films and ventured into various areas of business, including cookbooks, eyewear, jewelry, and perfume. She received a Golden Globe nomination for her performance in Robert Altman's film "Ready to Wear" (1994), co-starring Julia Roberts.

In 1994, a Golden Palm Star on the Palm Springs, California Walk of Stars was dedicated to her.

In "Grumpier Old Men" (1995), Loren played a "femme fatale" opposite Walter Matthau, Jack Lemmon, and Ann-Margret. The film was a box-office success and became Loren's biggest US hit in years. At the 20th Moscow International Film Festival in 1997, she was awarded an Honorable Prize for contribution to cinema. In 1999, the American Film Institute named Loren among the greatest female stars of Golden Age of Hollywood cinema. In 2001, Loren received a Special Grand Prix of the Americas Award at the Montreal World Film Festival for her body of work. She filmed two projects in Canada during this time: the independent film "Between Strangers" (2002), directed by her son Edoardo and co-starring Mira Sorvino, and the television miniseries "Lives of the Saints" (2004).

In 2009, after five years off the set and 14 years since she starred in a prominent US theatrical film, Loren starred in Rob Marshall's film version of "Nine", based on the Broadway musical that tells the story of a director whose midlife crisis causes him to struggle to complete his latest film; he is forced to balance the influences of numerous formative women in his life, including his deceased mother. Loren was Marshall's first and only choice for the role. The film also stars Daniel Day-Lewis, Penélope Cruz, Kate Hudson, Marion Cotillard, and Nicole Kidman. As a part of the cast, she received her first nomination for a Screen Actors Guild Award.

In 2010, Loren played her own mother in a two-part Italian television miniseries about her early life, directed by Vittorio Sindoni, entitled "La Mia Casa È Piena di Specchi" (translated "My House Is Full of Mirrors"), based on the memoir written by her sister Maria. In July 2013, Loren was reportedly going to make her film comeback in an Italian adaptation of Jean Cocteau's 1930 play "The Human Voice" ("La Voce Umana") which charts the breakdown of a woman who is left by her lover – with her youngest son, Edoardo Ponti, as director. Filming is to take under a month during July in various locations in Italy, including Rome and Naples. It will be Loren's first significant feature film since the 2009 film "Nine", which received mixed critical reviews.

Sophia Loren received a star on November 16, 2017 at Almeria Walk of Fame due to his intervention in "Bianco, rosso e...". She received the Almería Tierra de Cine award.

In September 1999, Loren filed a lawsuit against 76 adult websites for posting altered nude photos of her on the internet.

Loren is a Roman Catholic. Her primary residence has been in Geneva, Switzerland, since late 2006. She also owns homes in Naples and Rome.

Loren is a huge fan of the football club S.S.C. Napoli. In May 2007, when the team was third in Serie B, she told the "Gazzetta dello Sport" that she would do a striptease if the team won.

Loren posed scantily clad, at age 72, for the 2007 Pirelli Calendar, along with Penélope Cruz and Hilary Swank.

Loren and Cary Grant co-starred in "Houseboat" (1958). Grant's wife Betsy Drake wrote the original script, and Grant originally intended that she would star with him. After he began an affair with Loren while filming "The Pride and the Passion" (1957), Grant arranged for Loren to take Drake's place with a rewritten script for which Drake did not receive credit. The affair ended in bitterness before "The Pride and the Passion"s filming ended, causing problems on the "Houseboat" set. Grant hoped to resume the relationship, but Loren agreed to marry Carlo Ponti, instead.

Loren first met Carlo Ponti, Sr. in 1950, when she was 16 and he was 37. They married on 17 September 1957. However, Ponti was still officially married to his first wife Giuliana. The couple had their marriage annulled in 1962 to escape bigamy charges. In 1965, Ponti obtained a divorce from Giuliana in France, allowing him to marry Loren on 9 April 1966.

The couple became French citizens after their application was approved by then French President Georges Pompidou.

They had two children:

Loren's daughters-in-law are Sasha Alexander and Andrea Meszaros. Loren has four grandchildren.

Loren remained married to Carlo Ponti until his death on 10 January 2007 of pulmonary complications.

In 1962, Loren's sister, Anna Maria Villani Scicolone, married the youngest son of Benito Mussolini, Romano, with whom she had two daughters, Alessandra, a national conservative Italian politician, and Elisabetta.

According to box office polls, Loren was voted among the most popular stars with British audiences.







</doc>
<doc id="177771" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=177771" title="Helen Hayes">
Helen Hayes

Helen Hayes MacArthur (née Brown; October 10, 1900 – March 17, 1993) was an American actress whose career spanned almost 80 years. She eventually garnered the nickname "First Lady of American Theatre" and was one of 12 people who have won an Emmy, a Grammy, an Oscar, and a Tony Award (an EGOT). Hayes also received the Presidential Medal of Freedom, America's highest civilian honor, from President Ronald Reagan in 1986.

In 1988, she was awarded the National Medal of Arts. The annual Helen Hayes Awards, which have recognized excellence in professional theatre in greater Washington, DC, since 1984, are her namesake. In 1955, the former Fulton Theatre on 46th Street in New York City's Broadway Theater District was renamed the Helen Hayes Theatre. When that venue was torn down in 1982, the nearby Little Theatre was renamed in her honor. Helen Hayes is regarded as one of the Greatest Leading Ladies of the 20th century theatre.

Helen Hayes Brown was born in Washington, D.C., on October 10, 1900. Her mother, Catherine Estelle (née Hayes), or Essie, was an aspiring actress who worked in touring companies. Her father, Francis van Arnum Brown, worked at a number of jobs, including as a clerk at the Washington Patent Office and as a manager and salesman for a wholesale butcher. Hayes' Irish Catholic maternal grandparents emigrated from Ireland during the Irish Potato Famine.

Hayes began a stage career at an early age. She said her stage debut was as a five-year-old singer at Washington's Belasco Theatre, on Lafayette Square, across from the White House. By the age of ten, she had made a short film called "Jean and the Calico Doll", but moved to Hollywood only when her husband, playwright Charles MacArthur, signed a Hollywood deal. Helen Hayes MacArthur, also known as Helen Brown in her early years, attended Dominican Academy's prestigious primary school, located on Manhattan's Upper East Side, from 1910 to 1912 during which she appeared in The Old Dutch, Little Lord Fauntleroy, as well as other performances. She attended the Academy of the Sacred Heart Convent in Washington and graduated in 1917.

Her sound film debut was "The Sin of Madelon Claudet", for which she won the Academy Award for Best Actress. She followed that with starring roles in "Arrowsmith" (with Ronald Colman), "A Farewell to Arms" (with actor Gary Cooper, whom Hayes admitted to finding extremely attractive), "The White Sister" (opposite Clark Gable), "What Every Woman Knows" (a reprise from her Broadway hit), and "". However, Hayes did not prefer that medium to the stage.

Hayes eventually returned to Broadway in 1935, where for three years she played the title role in the Gilbert Miller production of "Victoria Regina", with Vincent Price as Prince Albert, first at the Broadhurst Theatre and later at the Martin Beck Theatre.

In 1951, she was involved with the Broadway revival of J.M. Barrie's play Mary Rose at the ANTA Playhouse.

In 1953, she was the first-ever recipient of the Sarah Siddons Award for her work in Chicago theatre, repeating as the winner in 1969. She returned to Hollywood in the 1950s, and her film star began to rise. She starred in "My Son John" (1952) and "Anastasia" (1956), and won the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress for her role as an elderly stowaway in the disaster film "Airport" (1970). She followed that up with several roles in Disney films such as "Herbie Rides Again", "One of Our Dinosaurs is Missing" and "Candleshoe". Her performance in "Anastasia" was considered a comeback—she had suspended her career for several years due to the death of her daughter Mary, and her husband's failing health.

In 1955, the Fulton Theatre was renamed for her. However, business interests in the 1980s wished to raze that theatre and four others to construct a large hotel that included the Marquis Theatre. To accomplish razing this theatre and three others, as well as the Hotel Astor, the business interests received Hayes' consent to raze the theatre named for her, though she had no ownership interest in the buildings. Parts of the original Helen Hayes Theatre on Broadway were used to construct the Shakespeare Center on the Upper Westside of Manhattan, which Hayes dedicated with Joseph Papp in 1982. In 1983 the Little Theater on West 45th Street was renamed the Helen Hayes Theatre in her honor, as was a theatre in Nyack, which has since been renamed the Riverspace-Arts Center. In early 2014, the site was refurbished and styled by interior designer Dawn Hershko and reopened as the Playhouse Market, a quaint restaurant and gourmet deli.

Hayes, who spoke with her good friend Anita Loos almost daily on the phone, remarked to her friend "I used to think New York was the most enthralling place in the world. I'll bet it still is and if I were free next summer, I would prove it." With that, she convinced her friend to embark on an exploration of all five boroughs of New York. They visited and explored the off-the-beaten track of the city; Bellevue Hospital at night, riding a tug boat hauling garbage out to sea, they went to parties, libraries, and Puerto Rican markets. They spoke to everyday people to see how they lived their lives and what made the city tick. The result of this collaborative effort was the book, "Twice Over Lightly", published in 1972.

It is unclear when or by whom Hayes was called the "First Lady of the Theatre". Her friend, actress Katharine Cornell, also held that title, and each thought the other deserved it. One critic said that Cornell played every queen as though she were a woman, whereas Hayes played every woman as though she were a queen.

In 1982, with friend Lady Bird Johnson, she founded the National Wildflower Research Center, now the Lady Bird Johnson Wildflower Center in Austin, Texas. The center protects and preserves North America's native plants and natural landscapes.

The Helen Hayes Award for theater in the Washington, DC, area is named in her honor. She has a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame at 6220 Hollywood Blvd. Helen Hayes is also a member of the American Theatre Hall of Fame.

Hayes was a Catholic and a pro-business Republican who attended many Republican National Conventions (including the one held in New Orleans in 1988), but she was not as politically vocal as some others (e.g., Adolphe Menjou, Ginger Rogers, John Wayne, Ronald Reagan etc.) in the Hollywood community of that time.

Hayes wrote three memoirs: "A Gift of Joy", "On Reflection", and "My Life in Three Acts". Some of the themes in these books include her return to Roman Catholicism (she had been denied communion from the Church for the length of her marriage to Charles MacArthur, who was a divorced Protestant); and the death of her only daughter, Mary (1930–1949), who was an aspiring actress, from polio at the age of 19. Hayes's adopted son, James MacArthur (1937–2010), went on to a career in acting, starring in "Hawaii Five-O" on television. Hayes guest-starred on a 1975 episode of her son's show, Hawaii Five-0, in the episode "Retire in Sunny Hawaii... Forever" and later, in 1980, both appeared in the episode "No Girls for Doc/Marriage of Convenience/The Caller/The Witness" of The Love Boat.

Hayes was hospitalized a number of times for her asthma condition, which was aggravated by stage dust, forcing her to retire from legitimate theater in 1971, at age 71.

Her last Broadway show was a 1970 revival of "Harvey", in which she co-starred with James Stewart. Clive Barnes wrote, "She epitomizes flustered charm almost as if it were a style of acting ... She is one of those actors ... where to watch how she is doing something is almost as pleasurable as what she is doing." She spent most of her last years writing and raising money for organizations that fight asthma.

Hayes was a generous donor of time and money to a number of causes and organizations, including the Riverside Shakespeare Company of New York City. Along with Mildred Natwick, she became a founding member of the company's Board of Advisors in 1981. She was also on the board of directors for the Greater New York Council of the Girl Scouts of the USA during the early 1970s.

In 1982, Hayes dedicated Riverside's The Shakespeare Center with New York theatre producer, Joseph Papp, and in 1985 returned to the New York stage in a benefit reading for the company with a reading of "A Christmas Carol" with the late Raul Julia, Len Cariou, Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio, Carole Shelley, Celeste Holm and Harold Scott, directed by W. Stuart McDowell. The next year Hayes performed a second benefit for the Riverside Shakespeare Company, this time at the Marquis Theatre, the construction of which had been made possible by the demolition of the Helen Hayes Theatre three years before. The production featured Rex Smith, Ossie Davis and F. Murray Abraham, produced by McDowell and directed by Robert Small, with Hayes narrating the performance.

According to her daughter-in-law, HB MacArthur, Hayes took the most pride, however, in her philanthropic work with Helen Hayes Hospital, a physical rehabilitation hospital located in West Haverstraw, NY. She was extremely proud of the strides the hospital made toward the rehabilitation of people with disabilities and is quoted as saying "I’ve seen my name in lights on theater marquees and in letters 20 feet tall on Broadway billboards, but nothing has ever given me greater sense of pride and satisfaction than my 49 year association with this unique hospital." 

Hayes became involved with the hospital in the 1940s, and was named to the Board of Visitors in 1944. In 1974, the hospital was renamed in her honor. She served on the Helen Hayes Hospital Board of Visitors for 49 years, until her death in 1993. In that time, she advocated tirelessly for the hospital and successfully led a fight to prevent the relocation of the facility to Albany in the 1960s. In the 1970s, she was instrumental in the successful lobbying for funding to transform the hospital into a state-of-the-art facility.

Hayes also contributed her enthusiastic support to hospital events and fund-raising efforts, including handing out diplomas to the children upon graduation when the hospital was still a pediatric care facility. She also faithfully attended the hospital's annual Classic Race, leading the race by riding in a classic car and handing out awards to runners, hand cyclists, and wheelchair racers, and generously offering the use of her home Pretty Penny for a dinner to launch the hospital's endowment fund.

Hayes died on St. Patrick's Day, 1993, from congestive heart failure in Nyack, New York. Lillian Gish, the "First Lady of American Cinema", was a great friend of Hayes, and had designated her as beneficiary of her estate, but Hayes survived her by less than a month. Hayes was interred in the Oak Hill Cemetery, Nyack, New York. In 2011, she was honored with a US postage stamp.

Diminutive and homespun, Helen Hayes was distinctly less glamorous than the other Great Ladies, but the qualities of modesty and practicality that she projected helped create her lasting appeal. Hayes was a stage star for five decades before retiring, when she continued to act occasionally on film, television, and radio.

In 1979, the Supersisters trading card set was produced and distributed; one of the cards featured Hayes's name and picture. In 1983, Hayes received the Award for Greatest Public Service Benefiting the Disadvantaged, an award given out annually by Jefferson Awards.





</doc>
<doc id="82765" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=82765" title="Maggie Smith">
Maggie Smith

Dame Margaret Natalie Smith, (born 28 December 1934) is an English actress. She has had an extensive, varied career on stage, film and television spanning over 66 years. Smith has appeared in over 50 films and is one of Britain's most recognizable actresses. A prominent figure in British culture for six decades, she was made a Dame by Queen Elizabeth II in 1990 for services to the performing arts, and received the Companion of Honour from the Queen in 2014 for services to drama.

Smith began her career on stage as a student performing at the Oxford Playhouse in 1952 and made her professional debut on Broadway in "New Faces of '56". For her work on the London stage, she has won a record five Best Actress Evening Standard Awards; for "The Private Ear" and "The Public Eye" (both 1962), "Hedda Gabler" (1970), "Virginia" (1981), "The Way of the World" (1984) and "Three Tall Women" (1994). She received Tony Award nominations for "Private Lives" (1975) and "Night and Day" (1979), before winning the 1990 Tony Award for Best Actress in a Play for "Lettice and Lovage". Other stage roles include Stratford Shakespeare Festival productions of "Antony and Cleopatra" (1976) and "Macbeth" (1978), and West End productions of "A Delicate Balance" (1997) and "The Breath of Life" (2002).

On screen, Smith first drew praise for the crime film "Nowhere to Go" (1958), for which she received her first BAFTA Award nomination. She has won two Academy Awards, winning Best Actress for "The Prime of Miss Jean Brodie" (1969) and Best Supporting Actress for "California Suite" (1978). She is one of only six actresses to have won in both categories. She has won a record four BAFTA Awards for Best Actress, including for "A Private Function" (1984) and "The Lonely Passion of Judith Hearne" (1988), a BAFTA for Best Supporting Actress for "Tea With Mussolini" (1999), and three Golden Globe Awards. A six-time Oscar nominee, her other nominations were for "Othello" (1965), "Travels with My Aunt" (1972), "A Room with a View" (1986), and "Gosford Park" (2001).

Smith played Professor Minerva McGonagall in the "Harry Potter" film series (2001–11). Other notable films include "Love and Pain and the Whole Damn Thing" (1973), "Death on the Nile" (1978), "Clash of the Titans" (1981), "Evil Under the Sun" (1982), "Hook" (1991), "Sister Act" (1992), "The Secret Garden" (1993), "The Best Exotic Marigold Hotel" (2012) and "The Lady in the Van" (2015). She won an Emmy Award in 2003 for "My House in Umbria", to become one of the few actresses to have achieved the Triple Crown of Acting, and starred as Lady Violet Crawley, Dowager Countess of Grantham on "Downton Abbey" (2010–15), for which she won three Emmys, her first non-ensemble Screen Actors Guild Award and her third Golden Globe. Her honorary awards include the BAFTA Special Award in 1993, the BAFTA Fellowship in 1996, and the Special Olivier Award in 2011. She received the Stratford Shakespeare Festival's Legacy Award in 2012, and the Bodley Medal by the University of Oxford's Bodleian Libraries in 2016.

Margaret Natalie Smith was born in Ilford, Essex, on 28 December 1934. Her father, Nathaniel Smith (1902–1991), was a public health pathologist from Newcastle upon Tyne who worked at Oxford University; her mother, Margaret Hutton ("née" Little; 1896–1977), was a Scottish secretary from Glasgow. During her childhood, Smith's parents told her the romantic story of how they had met on the train from Glasgow to London via Newcastle. She moved with her family to Oxford when she was four years old. She has two older twin brothers, Alistair (died 1981) and Ian. The latter went to architecture school. Smith attended Oxford High School until age 16, when she left to study acting at the Oxford Playhouse.

In 1952, aged 17, under the auspices of the Oxford University Dramatic Society, Smith began her career as Viola in "Twelfth Night" at the Oxford Playhouse. In 1954, she appeared in the television programme "Oxford Accents" produced by Ned Sherrin. She appeared in her first film in 1956, in an uncredited role in "Child in the House", and made her Broadway debut the same year playing several roles in the review "New Faces of '56", at the Ethel Barrymore Theatre from June to December 1956. In 1957, she starred opposite Kenneth Williams in the musical comedy "Share My Lettuce", written by Bamber Gascoigne. In 1958, she received the first of her 18 BAFTA Film and TV nominations for her role in the film "Nowhere to Go".

In 1962, Smith won the first of a record five Best Actress Evening Standard Awards for her roles in Peter Shaffer's plays "The Private Ear and The Public Eye", again opposite Kenneth Williams. She became a fixture at the Royal National Theatre in the 1960s, most notably for playing Desdemona in "Othello" opposite Laurence Olivier and earning her first Oscar nomination for her performance in the 1965 film version. She appeared opposite Olivier in Ibsen's "The Master Builder" and played comedic roles in "The Recruiting Officer" and "Much Ado About Nothing". Her other films at this time included "Go to Blazes" (1962), "The V.I.P.s" (1963), "The Pumpkin Eater" (1964), "Young Cassidy" (1965), "Hot Millions" (1968) and "Oh! What A Lovely War" (1969).

Smith won the Academy Award for Best Actress for her performance in the title role of the 1969 film "The Prime of Miss Jean Brodie". Vanessa Redgrave had originated the role on stage in London and Zoe Caldwell won the Tony Award for Best Actress in a Play, when she played the role in New York. The role also won Smith her first BAFTA Award. In 1970, she played the title role in Ingmar Bergman's London production of the Ibsen play "Hedda Gabler", winning her second Evening Standard award for Best Actress. She received her third Academy Award nomination for the 1972 film "Travels with My Aunt". She also appeared in the film "Love and Pain and the Whole Damn Thing" (1973). In the mid 1970s, she made several guest appearances on "The Carol Burnett Show".

From 1976 to 1980, she appeared in numerous productions at the Stratford Shakespeare Festival in Stratford, Ontario, to acclaim, her roles included Queen Elizabeth in "Richard III", Cleopatra, Lady Macbeth, Virginia Woolf in "Virginia", and opposite Brian Bedford in the Noël Coward comedy "Private Lives". Also during this time, she starred on Broadway in "Private Lives" in 1975 and "Night and Day" in 1979, receiving Tony Award nominations for both. Smith received the 1978 Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress for her role as Diana Barrie in "California Suite". For this role, she also won her first Golden Globe Award. Afterward, upon hearing that Michael Palin was about to embark on the film "The Missionary" (1982) with Smith, her co-star Michael Caine is supposed to have humorously telephoned Palin, warning him that she would steal the film. Her other films at this time include "Murder by Death" (1976) and "Death on the Nile" (1978).

In 1981, Smith played the goddess Thetis in "Clash of the Titans". For her role on television as "Mrs Silly", she received the first of her four Best Actress BAFTA TV Award nominations. On stage, she won her third and fourth Evening Standard awards for Best actress, for "Virginia" in 1981 and "The Way of the World" in 1984. She won three more Best Actress BAFTA Awards for her roles as Joyce Chilvers in the 1984 black comedy "A Private Function", Charlotte Bartlett in the 1986 Merchant Ivory production of "A Room with a View" and the title role in the 1987 film "The Lonely Passion of Judith Hearne". For "A Room With a View", she also received her fifth Academy Award nomination and won her second Golden Globe Award. In 1987, she starred in "A Bed Among the Lentils", part of Alan Bennett's Talking Heads series, receiving a second BAFTA TV nomination. She starred in the 1987 London production of "Lettice and Lovage" alongside Margaret Tyzack, receiving an Olivier Award nomination and reprised the role in 1990, when it transferred to Broadway and won the Tony Award for Best Actress in a Play. The play was written specifically for her by the playwright Peter Shaffer.

In the 1990s, Smith appeared as Wendy Darling in the 1991 hit movie "Hook", and also appeared in the hit comedy films "Sister Act" in 1992 and "The First Wives Club" in 1996. She also received a third BAFTA TV nomination for the 1992 TV film "Memento Mori" and her first Emmy nomination for her role in the 1993 TV film "Suddenly, Last Summer". She won a BAFTA for Best Supporting Actress for the 1999 film "Tea with Mussolini", in which she played Lady Hester. She also appeared in the films "Hook" (1991), "The Secret Garden" (1993), "Richard III" (1995) and "Washington Square" (1997). Her 1990s stage roles included "Three Tall Women" in 1994, which won her a fifth Evening Standard award, Claire in "A Delicate Balance" opposite Eileen Atkins in 1997 and "The Lady in the Van" in 1999.

Due to the international success of the "Harry Potter" movies, she is now widely known for playing Professor Minerva McGonagall, opposite Daniel Radcliffe in the title role. She has appeared in seven of the eight films in the series from 2001 to 2011. She and Radcliffe had worked together previously in the 1999 BBC television adaptation of "David Copperfield", in which she played Betsey Trotwood and received a BAFTA TV Award nomination. She received her sixth Academy Award nomination for the 2001 film "Gosford Park", directed by Robert Altman and won her first Emmy Award for the 2003 TV film "My House in Umbria". On stage, she starred as Madeleine Palmer opposite Judi Dench in the David Hare play "The Breath of Life" in 2002, toured Australia in Alan Bennett's "Talking Heads" in 2004 and starred in "The Lady from Dubuque" in 2007.

Since 2010, she has appeared as Violet Crawley, Dowager Countess of Grantham, in the British period drama "Downton Abbey". This role has won her a Golden Globe Award and two Emmy Awards. In 2014, the role also won her a Screen Actors Guild Award. In 2012, she played Muriel in the British comedy "The Best Exotic Marigold Hotel" and starred as Jean Horton in "Quartet", based on Ronald Harwood's play, directed by actor Dustin Hoffman.

In a March 2015 interview with Joe Utichi in "The Sunday Times", Smith announced that the sixth season of "Downton Abbey" would be her last (it was in fact the last to be produced). On 30 October 2015, Smith appeared on BBC's "The Graham Norton Show", her first appearance on a chat show in 42 years. During the show, Smith discussed her appearance in the comedy-drama film "The Lady in the Van", which was directed by Nicholas Hytner.

Smith married actor Robert Stephens on 29 June 1967 at Greenwich Register Office, ten days after the birth of their first child. They had two sons, actors Chris Larkin (born 1967) and Toby Stephens (born 1969), and were divorced on 6 May 1974. Smith married playwright Beverley Cross on 23 August 1975 at the Guildford Register Office, and they were married until his death on 20 March 1998. When asked in 2013 if she was lonely, she replied that "it seems a bit pointless, going on on one's own and not having someone to share it with". Smith has five grandchildren.

In January 1988, Smith was diagnosed with Graves' disease, for which she underwent radiotherapy and optical surgery.

In 2007, the "Sunday Telegraph" disclosed that Smith had been diagnosed with breast cancer. She was subsequently reported to have made a full recovery.

In September 2011, Smith offered her support for raising the $4.6 million needed to help rebuild the Court Theatre in Christchurch, New Zealand, after the earthquake in 2011 which caused severe damage to the area. In July 2012, she became a patron of the International Glaucoma Association, hoping to support the organization and raise the profile of glaucoma. On 27 November 2012, she contributed a drawing of her own hand to the 2012 Celebrity Paw Auction, to raise funds for Cats Protection.

Smith was appointed a Commander of the Order of the British Empire (CBE) in the 1970 New Year Honours, and was raised to Dame Commander of the Order of the British Empire (DBE) in the 1990 New Year Honours, for services to the performing arts. Smith was made a Member of the Order of the Companions of Honour (CH) for services to drama in the 2014 Queen's Birthday Honours, becoming the third actress to receive the honour, after Sybil Thorndike (1970) and Judi Dench (2005).

In 1971, Smith was conferred an honorary Doctor of Letters (DLitt) by University of St Andrews. In 1986, she was awarded an honorary Doctor of Letters (DLitt) from the University of Bath. In 1995, Smith received an honorary Doctor of Letters (DLitt) from the University of Cambridge. In October 2017, Smith was conferred with an Honorary Fellowship of Mansfield College, Oxford.

She was awarded the Shakespeare Prize by the Hamburg Alfred Toepfer Foundation in 1991. Smith was made a Fellow of the British Film Institute in recognition of her outstanding contribution to film culture in 1992. She was elected to the American Theatre Hall of Fame in 1994. On 10 April 1999 Smith received the William Shakespeare Award for Classical Theatre (The Will Award) presented by the Shakespeare Theatre Company in Washington, D.C. in recognition of her significant contribution to classical theatre in the US. On 9 February 2014 she was inducted into the Actors Hall of Fame. Smith had a star on the London Avenue of Stars until all of the stars were removed in 2006.

In 1993, she was awarded with the BAFTA Special Award by the British Academy of Film and Television Arts. On 1996, the British Academy of Film and Television Arts presented her with the BAFTA Fellowship, the highest honour the Academy can bestow. At the 2010 Laurence Olivier Awards, she was celebrated with the Society of London Theatre Special Award. In 2013, she was awarded with the Evening Standard Icon Award.

On 10 September 2012 she was honoured with the Stratford Shakespeare Festival’s Legacy Award. She accepted the award, presented to her by Christopher Plummer, in a ceremony at the Fairmont Royal York Hotel. In March 2016, Smith was awarded the Critics' Circle Award for Distinguished Service to the Arts. In April 2016, she was awarded the Bodley Medal by the University of Oxford's Bodleian Libraries in recognition of her outstanding contribution to the performing arts.





</doc>
<doc id="275355" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=275355" title="Frances McDormand">
Frances McDormand

Frances Louise McDormand (born June 23, 1957) is an American actress. She is one of the few performers who have achieved the Triple Crown of Acting: an Academy Award for "Fargo" (1996), a Tony Award for "Good People" (2011), and an Emmy Award for "Olive Kitteridge" (2014). McDormand also won a Golden Globe Award for "Three Billboards Outside Ebbing, Missouri" (2017).

She has been married to filmmaker Joel Coen since 1984 and has starred in a number of films by the Coen brothers, including "Blood Simple" (1984), "Raising Arizona" (1987), "Fargo" (1996), "The Man Who Wasn't There" (2001), "Burn After Reading" (2008), and "Hail, Caesar!" (2016). In addition to her Academy Award for Best Actress for "Fargo", McDormand has also been nominated in that category for "Three Billboards Outside Ebbing, Missouri" and nominated three times for the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress for her work in "Mississippi Burning" (1988), "Almost Famous" (2000), and "North Country" (2005). Her other notable films include "Short Cuts" (1993), "Primal Fear" (1996), "Wonder Boys" (2000), "Laurel Canyon" (2002), "Something's Gotta Give" (2003), "Moonrise Kingdom" (2012), and "The Good Dinosaur" (2015).

McDormand made her Broadway debut in the 1984 revival of "Awake and Sing", and received a Tony Award nomination for her acclaimed performance as Stella Kowalski in the 1988 revival of "A Streetcar Named Desire". She returned to Broadway for the first time in 20 years to star in the 2008 revival of "The Country Girl", leading to a Drama Desk Award nomination for Outstanding Actress in a Play.

McDormand was born in Gibson City, Illinois, and was adopted at one and a half years of age by a couple originally from Canada: Noreen E. (Nickleson), a registered nurse and receptionist, and Vernon W. McDormand, a Disciples of Christ pastor. She has said that her biological mother may have been one of the parishioners at Vernon's church. She has a sister, Dorothy A. McDormand, who is an ordained Disciples of Christ minister and chaplain, as well as another sibling, both of whom were adopted by the McDormands, who had no biological children.

Because her father specialized in restoring congregations, he frequently moved their family, and they lived in several small towns in Illinois, Georgia, Kentucky, and Tennessee, before settling in Monessen, Pennsylvania, where McDormand graduated from Monessen High School in 1975. She attended Bethany College in West Virginia, earning a Bachelor of Arts degree in theater in 1979. In 1982, she earned a Master of Fine Arts degree from the Yale School of Drama. She was a roommate of actress Holly Hunter at the time.

McDormand's first professional acting job was in Derek Walcott's play "Trinidad and Tobago", which was funded by the MacArthur Foundation. In 1984 she made her film debut in "Blood Simple", the first film by the Coen brothers. In 1987, she appeared as the wacky friend Dot in "Raising Arizona", starring Holly Hunter and Nicolas Cage. In addition to her early film roles, McDormand played Connie Chapman in the fifth season of the television police drama "Hill Street Blues". In 1988, she played Stella Kowalski in a stage production of Tennessee Williams' "A Streetcar Named Desire", for which she was nominated for a Tony Award. McDormand is an associate member of the experimental theater company The Wooster Group.

After appearing in several theatrical and television roles during the 1980s, McDormand gradually gained renown and critical acclaim for her dramatic work in film. In 1988, she was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress for "Mississippi Burning." In 1996, she won the Academy Award for Best Actress for her performance as police chief Marge Gunderson in "Fargo". In 2000, she was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress and the Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actress in a Motion Picture for her portrayal of an overbearing mother in "Almost Famous." For her role in "Wonder Boys" (2000), she won Best Supporting Actress from the Broadcast Film Critics Association, the Florida Film Critics Circle, and the Los Angeles Film Critics Association. In 2006, McDormand received her fourth nomination for the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress for her performance in "North Country" (2005). The same year she won an Independent Spirit Award for her supporting role in Nicole Holofcener's dark comedy "Friends with Money" (2006). She also voiced the role of the principal Melanie Upfoot in the "Simpsons" episode "Girls Just Want to Have Sums", which aired on April 30, 2006.

In 2008, McDormand starred in the films "Burn After Reading" and "Miss Pettigrew Lives for a Day". She then appeared in the action movie "", playing the US government's National Intelligence Director, alongside her "Burn After Reading" co-star John Malkovich. She returned to the stage in the David Lindsay-Abaire play "Good People", in a limited engagement on Broadway from February 8, 2011 to May 29, 2011. Her performance earned her the Tony Award for Best Actress in a Play. In the animated film "" (2012), she voiced Capitain Chantel Dubois and also sang a version of the French song "Non, je ne regrette rien".

McDormand starred in "Promised Land" with Matt Damon, filmed in April 2012 and released on December 28, 2012. In November 2014, HBO telecast a four-part mini-series based upon the series of short stories by Elizabeth Strout, "Olive Kitteridge", co-produced by and starring McDormand. The role won her the Primetime Emmy Award and Screen Actors Guild Award for Best Actress. With her Emmy win, McDormand became the 12th actress in history to achieve the Triple Crown of Acting, for competitive Oscar, Emmy and Tony Award wins in the acting categories. McDormand starred in the 2017 film "Three Billboards Outside Ebbing, Missouri", for which she was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Actress and received the Golden Globe Award for Best Actress in a Motion Picture – Drama and the Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Leading Role.

McDormand has been married to director Joel Coen since 1984, and the two adopted a son from Paraguay, Pedro McDormand Coen, in 1995. They live in New York City.



</doc>
<doc id="160985" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=160985" title="Emma Thompson">
Emma Thompson

Emma Thompson (born 15 April 1959) is a British actress and screenwriter. She is known for her portrayals of enigmatic women, often in period dramas and literary adaptations, and playing matronly characters with a sense of wit. She is one of Britain's most acclaimed actresses.

Born in London to English actor Eric Thompson and Scottish actress Phyllida Law, Thompson was educated at Newnham College, University of Cambridge, where she became a member of the Footlights troupe. After appearing in several comedy programmes, she first came to prominence in 1987 in two BBC TV series, "Tutti Frutti" and "Fortunes of War", winning the BAFTA TV Award for Best Actress for her work in both series. Her first film role was in the 1989 romantic comedy "The Tall Guy", and in the early 1990s, she frequently collaborated with her then husband, actor and director Kenneth Branagh. The pair became popular in the British media and co-starred in several films, including "Dead Again" (1991) and "Much Ado About Nothing" (1993).

In 1992, Thompson won an Academy Award and a BAFTA Award for Best Actress for the period drama "Howards End". In 1993, she garnered dual Academy Award nominations for her roles in "The Remains of the Day" as the housekeeper of a grand household and "In the Name of the Father" as a lawyer. Thompson scripted and starred in "Sense and Sensibility" (1995), which earned her (among other awards) an Academy Award for Best Adapted Screenplay, and a BAFTA Award for Best Actress. Other notable film and television credits include: the "Harry Potter" film series, "Wit" (2001), "Love Actually" (2003), "Angels in America" (2003), "Nanny McPhee" (2005), "Stranger than Fiction" (2006), "Last Chance Harvey" (2008), "Men in Black 3" (2012), "Brave" (2012) and "Beauty and the Beast" (2017). In 2013, she received acclaim and several award nominations for her portrayal of P. L. Travers in "Saving Mr. Banks".

Thompson is married to actor Greg Wise, with whom she lives in London. They have one daughter and an adopted son. She is an activist in the areas of human rights and environmentalism and has received criticism for her outspokenness. She has written two books adapted from "The Tale of Peter Rabbit".

Thompson was born in Paddington,
London, on 15 April 1959. Her mother is the Scottish actress Phyllida Law, while her English father, Eric Thompson, was involved in theatre, and was the writer–narrator of the popular children's television series "The Magic Roundabout". Her godfather was the director and writer Ronald Eyre. She has one sister, Sophie Thompson, who also works as an actress. The family lived in West Hampstead in north London, and Thompson was educated at Camden School for Girls. She spent much time in Scotland during her childhood and often visited Ardentinny, where her grandparents and uncle lived.

In her youth, Thompson was intrigued by language and literature, a trait which she attributes to her father, who shared her love of words. In 1977, she began studying for an English degree at Newnham College, University of Cambridge. Thompson believes that it was inevitable that she would become an actress, commenting that she was "surrounded by creative people and I don’t think it would ever have gone any other way, really". While there, she had a "seminal moment" that turned her to feminism and inspired her to take up performing. She explained in an interview in 2007 how she discovered the book "The Madwoman in the Attic", "which is about Victorian female writers and the disguises they took on in order to express what they wanted to express. That completely changed my life." She became a self-professed "punk rocker", with short red hair and a motorbike, and aspired to be a comedian like Lily Tomlin.

At Cambridge, Thompson was invited into Footlights, the university's prestigious sketch comedy troupe, by its president, Martin Bergman, becoming its first female member. Also in the troupe were fellow actors Stephen Fry and Hugh Laurie, and she had a romantic relationship with the latter. Fry recalled that "there was no doubt that Emma was going the distance. Our nickname for her was Emma Talented."
In 1980, Thompson served as the Vice President of Footlights, and co-directed the troupe's first all-female revue, "Woman's Hour". The following year, Thompson and her Footlights team won the Perrier Award at the Edinburgh Festival Fringe for their sketch show "The Cellar Tapes".

In 1982, Thompson's father died as a result of circulatory problems at the age of 52. The actress has commented that this "tore [the family] to pieces", and "I can't begin to tell you how much I regret his not being around". She added, "At the same time, it's possible that were he still alive I might never have had the space or courage to do what I've done ... I have a definite feeling of inheriting space. And power."

Thompson had her first professional role in 1982, touring in a stage version of "Not the Nine O'Clock News". She then turned to television, where much of her early work came with her Footlights co-stars Hugh Laurie and Stephen Fry. The regional ITV comedy series " There's Nothing To Worry About!" (1982) was their first outing, followed by the one-off BBC show "The Crystal Cube" (1983). "There's Nothing to Worry About!" later returned as the networked sketch show "Alfresco" (1983–84), which ran for two series with Thompson, Fry, Laurie, Ben Elton, and Robbie Coltrane. She later collaborated again with Fry and Laurie on the acclaimed BBC Radio 4 series "Saturday Night Fry" (1988).

In 1985, Thompson was cast in the West End revival of the musical "Me and My Girl", co-starring Robert Lindsay. It provided a breakthrough in her career, as the production earned rave reviews. She played the role of Sally Smith for 15 months, which exhausted the actress; she later remarked "I thought if I did the fucking "Lambeth Walk" one more time I was going to fucking throw up." At the end of 1985, she wrote and starred in her own one-off special for Channel 4, "Emma Thompson: Up for Grabs".

Thompson achieved another breakthrough in 1987, when she had leading roles in two television miniseries: "Fortunes of War", a World War II drama co-starring Kenneth Branagh, and "Tutti Frutti", a dark-comedy about a Scottish rock band with Robbie Coltrane. For these performances, Thompson won the British Academy Television Award for Best Actress. The following year, she wrote and starred in her own sketch comedy series for BBC, "Thompson", but this was poorly received. In 1989, she and Branagh—who had formed a romantic relationship—starred in a stage revival of "Look Back in Anger", directed by Judi Dench and produced by Branagh's Renaissance Theatre Company. Later that year, the pair starred in a televised version of the play.

Thompson's first cinema appearance came in the romantic comedy "The Tall Guy" (1989), the feature-film debut from screenwriter Richard Curtis. It starred Jeff Goldblum as a West End actor, and Thompson played the nurse with whom he falls in love. The film was not widely seen, but Thompson's performance was praised in "The New York Times", where Caryn James called her "an exceptionally versatile comic actress". She next turned to Shakespeare, appearing as Princess Katherine in Branagh's screen adaptation of "Henry V" (1989). The film was released to great critical acclaim.

Thompson and Branagh are considered by American writer and critic James Monaco to have led the "British cinematic onslaught" in the 1990s. She continued to experiment with Shakespeare in the new decade, appearing with Branagh in his stage productions of "A Midsummer Night's Dream" and "King Lear". Reviewing the latter, the "Chicago Tribune" praised her "extraordinary" performance of the "hobbling, stooped hunchback Fool". Thompson returned to cinema in 1991, playing a "frivolous aristocrat" in "Impromptu" with Judy Davis and Hugh Grant. and Thompson was nominated for Best Supporting Female at the Independent Spirit Awards. Her second release of 1991 was another pairing with Branagh, who also directed, in the Los Angeles-based noir "Dead Again". She played a woman who has forgotten her identity. Early in 1992, Thompson had a guest role in an episode of "Cheers" as Frasier Crane's first wife.

A turning point in Thompson's career came when she was cast opposite Anthony Hopkins and Vanessa Redgrave in the Merchant Ivory period drama "Howards End" (1992), based on the novel by E. M. Forster. The film explored the social class system in Edwardian England, with Thompson playing an idealistic, intellectual, forward-looking woman who comes into association with a privileged and deeply conservative family. She actively pursued the role by writing to director James Ivory, who agreed to an audition and then gave her the part. According to the critic Vincent Canby, the film allowed Thompson to "[come] into her own", away from Branagh. Upon release, Roger Ebert wrote that she was "superb in the central role: quiet, ironic, observant, with steel inside." "Howards End" was widely praised, a "surprise hit", and received nine Academy Award nominations. Among its three wins was the Best Actress trophy for Thompson, who was also awarded a Golden Globe and BAFTA for her performance. Reflecting on the role, "The New York Times" writes that the actress "found herself an international success almost overnight."

For her next two films, Thompson returned to working with Branagh. In "Peter's Friends" (1992), the pair starred with Stephen Fry, Hugh Laurie, Imelda Staunton, and Tony Slattery as a group of Cambridge alumni who are reunited ten years after graduating. The comedy was positively reviewed, and Desson Howe of "The Washington Post" wrote that Thompson was its highlight: "Even as a rather one-dimensional character, she exudes grace and an adroit sense of comic tragedy." She followed this with Branagh's screen version of "Much Ado About Nothing" (1993). The couple starred as Beatrice and Benedick, alongside a cast that also included Denzel Washington, Keanu Reeves, and Michael Keaton. Thompson was widely praised for the on-screen chemistry with Branagh and the natural ease with which she played the role marking another critical success for Thompson. Her performance earned a nomination for Best Female Lead at the Independent Spirit Awards.

Thompson reunited with Merchant–Ivory and Anthony Hopkins to film "The Remains of the Day" (1993), a film which has been described as a "classic" and the production team's definitive film. Based on Kazuo Ishiguro's novel about a housekeeper and butler in interwar Britain, the story is acclaimed for its study of loneliness and repression, though Thompson was particularly interested in looking at "the deformity that servitude inflicts upon people", since her grandmother had worked as a servant and made many sacrifices. She has named the film as one of the greatest experiences of her career, considering it to be a "masterpiece of withheld emotion". "The Remains of the Day" was a critical and commercial success, receiving eight Oscar nominations, including Best Picture and a second Best Actress nod for Thompson.

Along with her Best Actress nomination at the 66th Academy Awards, Thompson was also nominated in the Best Supporting Actress category, making her the eighth performer in history to be nominated for two Oscars in the same year. It came for her role as the lawyer Gareth Peirce in "In the Name of the Father" (1993), a drama about the Guildford Four starring Daniel Day-Lewis. The film was her second hit of the year, earning $65 million and critical praise, and was nominated for Best Picture along with "The Remains of the Day".

In 1994, Thompson made her Hollywood debut playing a goofy doctor alongside Arnold Schwarzenegger and Danny DeVito in the blockbuster "Junior". Although the male pregnancy storyline was poorly received by most critics and flopped at the box office, Mick LaSalle of the "San Francisco Chronicle" praised the lead trio. She returned to independent cinema for a lead role in "Carrington", which studied the platonic relationship between artist Dora Carrington and writer Lytton Strachey (played by Jonathan Price). Roger Ebert remarked that Thompson had "developed a specialty in unrequited love", and the "TV Guide Film & Video Companion" commented that her "neurasthenic mannerisms, which usually drive us batty, are appropriate here".

Thompson's Academy success continued with "Sense and Sensibility" (1995), generally considered to be the most popular and authentic of the numerous film adaptions of Jane Austen's novels made in the 1990s. Thompson—a lifelong lover of Austen's work—was hired to write the film based on the period sketches in her series "Thompson". She spent five years developing the screenplay, and took the role of the spinster sister Elinor Dashwood despite, at 35, being 16 years older than the literary character. Directed by Ang Lee and co-starring Kate Winslet, "Sense and Sensibility" received widespread critical praise and is one of the highest-grossing films of Thompson's career. Shelly Frome remarked that she displayed a "great affinity for Jane Austen's style and wit", and Graham Fuller of "Sight and Sound" saw her as the film's auteur. Thompson received a third nomination for Best Actress and won the award for Best Adapted Screenplay, making her the only person in history to win an Oscar for both acting and writing. She also earned a second BAFTA Award for Best Actress and a Golden Globe Award for Best Screenplay.

Thompson was absent from screens in 1996, but returned the following year with Alan Rickman's directorial debut, "The Winter Guest". Set over one day in a Scottish seaside village, the drama allowed Thompson and her mother (Phyllida Law) to play mother and daughter on screen. She then returned to America to appear in an episode of "Ellen", and her self-parodying performance received a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Guest Actress in a Comedy Series.

For her second Hollywood role, Thompson starred with John Travolta in Mike Nichols's "Primary Colors" (1998), playing a couple based on Bill and Hillary Clinton. Thompson's character, Susan, is described as that of an "ambitious, long-suffering wife" who has to deal with her husband's infidelity. The film was critically well received but lost money at the box office. According to Kevin O'Sullivan of the "Daily Mirror", Americans were "blown away" by her performance and accent, and top Hollywood producers became increasingly interested in casting her. Thompson rejected many of the offers, expressing concerns about living in Los Angeles behind walls with bodyguards, and stated "LA is lovely as long as you know you can leave". She also admitted to feeling tired and jaded with the industry at this point, which influenced her decision to leave film for a year. Thompson followed "Primary Colors" by playing an FBI agent opposite Rickman in the poorly received thriller "Judas Kiss" (1998).

When she became a mother in 1999, Thompson made a conscious decision to reduce her workload, and in the following years many of her appearances were supporting roles. She was not seen on screen again until 2000, with only a small part in the British comedy "Maybe Baby", which she appeared in as a favour to its director, her friend Ben Elton.

For the HBO television film "Wit" (2001), however, Thompson happily took the lead role in what she felt was "one of the best scripts to have come out of America". Adapted from Margaret Edson's Pulitzer Prize winning play, it focusses on a self-sufficient Harvard University professor who finds her values challenged when she is diagnosed with ovarian cancer. Thompson was instrumental in bringing Mike Nichols to direct the project, and the pair spent months in rehearsal to get the complex character right. She was greatly drawn to the "daredevil" role, for which she had no qualms about shaving her head. Reviewing the performance, Roger Ebert was touched by "the way she struggles with every ounce of her humanity to keep her self-respect", and in 2008 he called it Thompson's finest work. Caryn James of "The New York Times" also described it as "one of her most brilliant performances", adding "we seem to be peering into a soul as embattled as its body." The film earned Thompson nominations at the Golden Globes, Emmys and Screen Actors Guild Awards.

Thompson's only credit of 2002 was a vocal performance in Disney's "Treasure Planet", an adaptation of "Treasure Island", where she voiced Captain Amelia. The animation earned far less than its large budget and was considered a "box office disaster". This failure was countered the following year by one of Thompson's biggest commercial successes, Richard Curtis's romantic comedy "Love Actually". As part of an ensemble cast that included Liam Neeson, Keira Knightley, and Colin Firth, she played a middle-class wife who suspects her husband (played by Alan Rickman) of infidelity. The scene in which her stalwart character breaks down was described by one critic as "the best crying on screen ever", and in 2013, Thompson mentioned that she gets commended for this role more than any other. She explained, "I've had so much bloody practice at crying in a bedroom then having to go out and be cheerful, gathering up the pieces of my heart and putting them in a drawer." Her performance received a BAFTA nomination for Best Supporting Actress.

Thompson continued with supporting roles in the 2003 drama "Imagining Argentina", where she played a dissident-journalist abducted by the country's 1970s dictatorial regime. Antonio Banderas played the husband who tries to find her, in a film that most critics disliked. The film was booed and jeered at when it was screened at the Venice Film Festival and received a scathing article in "The Guardian". Thompson had greater success that year when she worked with HBO for a second time in the acclaimed miniseries "Angels in America" (2003). The show, also featuring Al Pacino and Meryl Streep, dealt with the AIDS epidemic in Reagan-era America. Thompson played three roles – a nurse, a homeless woman, and the title role of The Angel of America – and was again nominated for an Emmy Award. In 2004, she played the eccentric Divination teacher Sybill Trelawney in the third "Harry Potter" film, the "Prisoner of Azkaban", her character described as a "hippy chick professor who teaches fortune-telling". She later reprised her role in the "Order of the Phoenix" (2007) and the "Deathly Hallows – Part 2" (2011), and has called her time on the popular franchise "great fun".

The year 2005 saw the release of a project Thompson had been working on for nine years. Loosely based on the "Nurse Matilda" stories that she read as a child, Thompson wrote the screenplay for the children's film "Nanny McPhee" – which centres on a mysterious, unsightly nanny who must discipline a group of children. She also took the lead role, alongside Colin Firth and Angela Lansbury, in what was a highly personal project. The film was a success, taking number one at the UK box office and earning $122 million worldwide. Commenting on Thompson's screenplay, film critic Claudia Puig wrote that its "well-worn storybook features are woven effectively into an appealing tale of youthful empowerment". The following year, Thompson appeared in the surreal American comedy–drama "Stranger than Fiction", playing a novelist whose latest character (played by Will Ferrell) is a real person who hears her narration in his head. Reviews for the film were generally favourable.

Following a brief, uncredited role in the post-apocalyptic blockbuster "I Am Legend" (2007), Thompson played the devoutly Catholic Lady Marchmain in a 2008 film adaptation of "Brideshead Revisited". Critics were unenthusiastic about the film, but several picked Thompson out as its highlight. Mark Kermode said "Emma Thompson is to some extent becoming the new Judi Dench, as the person who kind of comes in for 15 minutes and is brilliant ... [but then] when she goes away, the rest of the movie has a real problem living up to the wattage of her presence". Thompson was further acclaimed for her work in the London-based romance "Last Chance Harvey" (2008), where she and Dustin Hoffman played a lonely, middle-aged pair who cautiously begin a relationship. Critics praised the chemistry between the two leads, and both received Golden Globe nominations for their performances. Thompson's two 2009 films were both set in 1960s England, and in both she made cameo appearances: as a headmistress in the critically praised drama "An Education" and as a "tippling mother" in Richard Curtis's "The Boat that Rocked".

Five years after the original, Thompson returned to Nanny McPhee with 2010's "Nanny McPhee and the Big Bang". Her screenplay transported the story to Britain during the Second World War, and incorporated a new cast including Maggie Gyllenhaal. Building on the first film's success, it was another UK box office number one and the sequel was widely seen as an improvement. The same year, Thompson reunited with Alan Rickman for the BBC television film "The Song of Lunch", which focused on two unnamed characters meeting at a restaurant 15 years after ending their relationship. Thompson's performance earned her a fourth Emmy Award nomination.

In 2012, Thompson made a rare appearance in a big-budget Hollywood film when she played the head Agent in "Men in Black 3" – a continuation of the popular sci-fi comedy franchise starring Will Smith. With a worldwide gross of $624 million, "MIB3" is Thompson's biggest commercial hit outside of the "Harry Potter" films. This mainstream success continued with the Pixar film "Brave", in which Thompson voiced Elinor – the Scottish queen despairing at her daughter's defiance against tradition. It was her second consecutive blockbuster release, and critics were generally kind to the film. Also in 2012, Thompson played Queen Elizabeth II in an episode of "Playhouse Presents", which dramatised an incident in 1982 when an intruder broke into the Queen's bedroom. Her first film of 2013 was the fantasy romance "Beautiful Creatures", in which she played an evil mother. The film aimed to capitalise on the success of "The Twilight Saga", but was poorly reviewed and a box office disappointment. Film critic Peter Travers was critical of Thompson's performance and "outrageously awful Southern accent", and feared "the damage this crock may do to [her] reputation".

Conversely, her next appearance was so successful that it led one journalist to write "Emma Thompson is back, firing on all cylinders." "Saving Mr. Banks" depicted the making of "Mary Poppins", and starred Thompson as P. L. Travers, curmudgeonly author of the source novel, and Tom Hanks as Walt Disney. The actress considered it the best screenplay she had read in years and was delighted to be offered the role. She considered it to be the most challenging of her career because she had "never really played anyone quite so contradictory or difficult before", but found the inconsistent and complicated character "a blissful joy to embody". The film was well-received, grossed $112 million worldwide, and critics were unanimous in their praise for Thompson's performance. The review in "The Independent" expressed thanks that her "playing of Travers is so deft that we instantly warm to her, and forgive her her snobbery", while "Total Film"'s critic felt that Thompson brought depth to the "predictable" film with "her best performance in years". Thompson was nominated for Best Actress at the BAFTAs, SAGs and Golden Globes, and received the Lead Actress trophy from the National Board of Review. Meryl Streep stated that she was "shocked" to see that Thompson did not receive an Academy Award nomination for the film.

The romantic-comedy "The Love Punch" (2013) gave Thompson her second consecutive leading role, where she and Pierce Brosnan played a divorced couple who reunite to steal his ex-boss's jewellery. In March 2014, she made her first stage appearance in 24 years – and her New York debut – in a Lincoln Center production of "". She appeared in the musical for five nights, and her "playful" performance of Mrs Lovett was highly praised; the critic Kayla Epstein wrote that she "not only held her own against more experienced vocalists, but wound up running off with the show." She received her sixth Emmy nomination for the televised version of the show. In 2014, Thompson provided the narration for Jason Reitman's film "Men, Women & Children",

The period drama "Effie Gray", a project that she had been working on for many years, based on the true-life story of John Ruskin's disastrous marriage, was written by Thompson but became the subject of a copyright suit before being cleared for cinemas. The American playwright Gregory Murphy claimed that Thompson's screenplay was an infringement on his play and screenplay "The Countess", which deals with the same story. Murphy was initially offered a screenwriting fee and co-screenwriting credit with Thompson by Potboiler Productions, the original producers of "Effie Gray", in settlement of his claim, but this settlement offer was impugned by Thompson and Donald Rosenfeld, the film's subsequent producers who instigated the suit. In March 2013, the judge in the case, after allowing Thompson to submit a second revised screenplay into evidence from which Murphy claimed "some of the most troubling material" had been removed, ruled that while there were similarities, the screenplays were "quite dissimilar in their two approaches to fictionalising the same historical events". "Effie Gray" was released in October 2014, to a modest reception. Thompson plays Elizabeth Eastlake and her husband, Greg Wise, plays John Ruskin. They both declined to promote the film.
Thompson's first film of 2015 was "A Walk in the Woods", a comedy adapted from the book by Bill Bryson, where she appeared opposite Robert Redford and Nick Nolte. She next starred with Robert Carlyle in his directoral debut "The Legend of Barney Thomson". Her role was his 77-year-old mother, a Glaswegian foul-mouthed, chain-smoking former prostitute. Neither film was a critical success, although the latter received some positive reviews and "Empire" magazine wrote that Thomson was "unforgettable". Later that year, she had a supporting role in John Wells' restaurant-based film "Burnt", alongside Bradley Cooper. In 2016, she starred with Brendan Gleeson in the World War II-drama "Alone in Berlin", based on the story of Otto and Elise Hampel. She also co-wrote the screenplay for "Bridget Jones's Baby" and appeared in the comedy as a doctor.

In 2017, Thompson appeared as Mrs. Potts (played by Angela Lansbury in the 1991 animated film) in Disney's live action film "Beauty and the Beast", directed by Bill Condon. It grossed $1.2 billion worldwide, making it the 11th highest-grossing film of all time. She also had a supporting role as a hippy in Noah Baumbach's dramedy "The Meyerowitz Stories", which played in competition at Cannes and received critical acclaim. She followed it with a starring role in the Richard Eyre film "The Children Act", a drama about a family who refuse cancer treatment for their son based on religious beliefs.

She had a cameo role as Queen Elizabeth I in the 2017 Christmas special of the BBC sitcom Upstart Crow.

Thompson is widely considered to be one of the finest actresses of her generation and one of Britain's best-known actresses, accepted in Hollywood. Early in her career, when she was closely associated with her first husband Kenneth Branagh, she was somewhat unpopular and considered a "luvvy". The public warmed to her after the separation, and she became one of the key actresses of the 1990s. Her status has continued to grow; in 2008, journalist Sarah Sands stated that Thompson has improved with age and experience, and Mark Kermode said of her performances, "There is something about her which is — you just trust her. You just think 'I'm in proper hands here.' ... She's up there with the great, I mean really great, British female performers".

Thompson is particularly known for playing reticent women, and Sands describes her as "the best actress of our times on suffering borne with poignant dignity". According to Kate Kellaway of "The Guardian", she specialises in playing "a good woman in a frock". She also plays many haughty characters, with a "bracing, nanny-like demeanour", but she is noted for her ability to win the empathy of audiences. Thompson belongs to a group of highly decorated British actresses including Judi Dench, Kate Winslet and Helena Bonham Carter who are known for appearing in "heritage films" and typically showing "restraint, rendering emotions through intellect rather than feelings, and a sense of irony, which demonstrates the heroine's superior understanding". Projecting a typically "British image", Thompson's often dogmatic and tight-jawed manner has also been compared to Maggie Smith.

With a background in comedy, Thompson's performances are typically delivered with an ironic touch. Ang Lee, director of "Sense and Sensibility" stated that Thompson's comedic approach may be her greatest asset as an actress, remarking, "Emma is an extremely funny lady. Like Austen, she's laughing at her own culture while she's a part of it." Thompson has stated that the "most moving things are often also funny, in life and in art" which is present in her film work. She often brings her real personality to her roles, and Kellaway believes that her lack of conventional beauty contributes to her likeability as an actress.

Thompson, although born in London, has confessed to feeling Scottish: "not only because I am half Scottish but also because I've spent half my life here". She frequently returns to Scotland and visits Dunoon in Argyll and Bute, where she owns a home.

Thompson's first husband was the actor and director Kenneth Branagh, whom she met in 1987 while filming the television series "Fortunes of War". The couple married in 1989 and proceeded to appear in several films together, with Branagh often casting her in his own productions. Dubbed a "golden couple" by the British media, the relationship received considerable press interest. The pair attempted to keep their relationship private, refusing to be interviewed or photographed together. In September 1995, Thompson and Branagh announced that they had separated; their statement to the press blamed their work schedules, but it later emerged that he had fallen in love with actress Helena Bonham Carter.

Thompson was living alone as the relationship with Branagh deteriorated, and entered into clinical depression. While filming "Sense and Sensibility" in 1995, she began a relationship with her co-star Greg Wise. Commenting on how she was able to overcome her depression, she told BBC Radio Four, "Work saved me and Greg saved me. He picked up the pieces and put them together again." The couple had a daughter, Gaia, in 1999. The pregnancy was achieved through IVF treatment when Thompson was 39.

In 2003, Thompson and Wise were married in Dunoon. The family's permanent residence is in West Hampstead, London, on the same road as her childhood home. Also in 2003, Thompson and her husband informally adopted a Rwandan orphan and former child soldier named Tindyebwa Agaba. They met at a Refugee Council event when he was 16, and she invited him to spend Christmas at their home. "Slowly," Thompson has commented, "he became a sort of permanent fixture, came on holiday to Scotland with us, became part of the family." Agaba became a British citizen in 2009.

Thompson has said of her religious views: "I'm an atheist ... I regard religion with fear and suspicion. It's not enough to say that I don't believe in God. I actually regard the system as distressing: I am offended by some of the things said in the Bible and the Qur'an and I refute them." She is politically liberal and a supporter of the Labour Party; she told the BBC "Andrew Marr Show" in 2010 that she had been a member of the party "all my life." Thompson endorsed Jeremy Corbyn's campaign in both the 2015 and 2016 Labour Party leadership elections. She has also expressed support for the Women's Equality Party.

Thompson has been a campaigner since her youth. Since becoming a public figure she has regularly voiced her views and been involved in many issues, prompting criticism that she is overly outspoken. In 2010, "The Daily Telegraph" asked: "Emma Thompson: a national treasure or Britain's most annoying woman?" She has justified her assertiveness by saying, "what I feel is that we all need to speak up and a woman who has got a louder voice needs to shout very loudly indeed."

She is particularly active in human rights work. As an ambassador for the charity ActionAid she has travelled to Uganda, Mozambique, Ethiopia, Liberia, and Burma. She is chair of the Helen Bamber Foundation for the Care of Victims of Torture, a patron of the Refugee Council, and has a therapy room in her office for traumatised refugees. Thompson is also an activist for Palestinians, having been a member of the British-based ENOUGH! coalition that seeks to end the "Israeli occupation of the Gaza Strip and West Bank." She is a patron of the Elton John AIDS Foundation, and in 2009 "Time" named her a "European Hero" in recognition of "her work to highlight the plight of AIDS sufferers in Africa."

Aside from humanitarian work, Thompson is also an active environmentalist. She is a supporter of Greenpeace, and in January 2009, as part of her campaign against climate change, she and three other members of the organisation bought land near the village of Sipson to deter the building of a third runway for Heathrow Airport. In August 2014, Thompson and her daughter, Gaia, went on a Greenpeace "Save the Arctic" expedition to raise awareness of the dangers of drilling for oil. She narrated The Real News Network's "", a documentary short about Koch Industries and its efforts to discredit climate research. The film was released on 31 October 2016. She is also an ambassador for the Galapagos Conservation Trust.

In 2012, Thompson wrote "The Further Tale of Peter Rabbit" as an addition to the Peter Rabbit series by Beatrix Potter to commemorate the 110th anniversary of the publication of "The Tale of Peter Rabbit". She was approached by the publishers to write it, the first authorised Peter story since 1930 and the only one not written by Potter. The book falls in the middle of the earlier series, rather than at the end, and takes Peter Rabbit outside of Mr. McGregor's garden and into Scotland. It was a "New York Times" Best Seller. In 2013, Thompson wrote a second book in the series titled "The Christmas Tale of Peter Rabbit".

As of July 2017, Thompson has appeared in 44 films, 20 television programmes and eight stage productions. She has won and been nominated for many awards during her career, including five Academy Award nominations (winning two), nine Golden Globe Award nominations (winning two), seven BAFTA Award nominations (winning three), and six Emmy Award nominations (winning one).





</doc>
<doc id="38459" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38459" title="Natalie Portman">
Natalie Portman

Natalie Portman (born Neta-Lee Hershlag; ; June 9, 1981) is an actress, film director and film producer with dual American and Israeli citizenship. Portman is best known for her roles as Padmé Amidala in the "Star Wars" prequel trilogy and Nina Sayers in "Black Swan" (2010); she won an Academy Award, Golden Globe Award and Screen Actors Guild Award, among other accolades, for her performance in the latter. 

Portman made her film debut in "" (1994), which co-starred Jean Reno and Gary Oldman. At the same time, she studied dancing and acting in New York, and starred in "" (1999) while still at high school in Long Island. In 1999, Portman enrolled at Harvard University to study psychology, alongside her work as an actress; she completed a bachelor's degree in 2003. During her studies she starred in "" (2002) and opened in New York City's The Public Theater production of Anton Chekhov's "The Seagull" in 2001.

Portman was nominated for an Academy Award and won a Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actress – Motion Picture for her role in "Closer" (2004), and went on to play leading roles in "V for Vendetta" (2006), "Goya's Ghosts" (2006), "Mr. Magorium's Wonder Emporium" (2007), "The Other Boleyn Girl" (2008) and "No Strings Attached" (2011). She also starred as Jane Foster in the Marvel Cinematic Universe (MCU) films "Thor" (2011) and "" (2013), and portrayed First Lady Jacqueline Kennedy in "Jackie" (2016); for her role in the latter, she was nominated for an Academy Award, Golden Globe Award, Screen Actors Guild Award and BAFTA Award, and won the Critics' Choice Movie Award for Best Actress.

In May 2008, Portman served as the youngest member of the 61st Annual Cannes Film Festival jury. Later that year, she also directed a segment of the collective film "New York, I Love You". Her first feature film as a director, "A Tale of Love and Darkness", was released in 2015. Portman has also featured prominently on television, twice hosting "Saturday Night Live" and twice appearing on "The Simpsons".

Portman was born on June 9, 1981 in Jerusalem. Her original given name was Neta-Lee, a Hebrew name. She is the only child of Shelley (née Stevens), an American homemaker who works as Portman's agent, and Avner Hershlag, an Israeli fertility specialist and gynecologist. Her maternal grandparents, Bernice (née Hurwitz; 19252014) and Arthur Stevens (whose family surname was originally Edelstein), were from Jewish families who moved to the United States from Austria and Russia. Natalie's paternal grandparents, Mania (née Portman) and Zvi Yehuda Hershlag, were Jewish immigrants to Israel. Zvi, born in Poland in 1914, moved to what was then Mandatory Palestine in 1938 and eventually became an economics professor; his parents died at the Auschwitz Concentration Camp. One of Natalie's paternal great-grandmothers was born in Romania and was a spy for British Intelligence during World War II.

Portman's parents met at a Jewish student center at the Ohio State University, where her mother was selling tickets. They corresponded after her father returned to Israel and were married when her mother visited a few years later. In 1984, when Portman was three years old, the family moved to the United States, where her father received his medical training. Portman, a dual citizen of the United States and Israel, has said that although she "really love[s] the States... my heart's in Jerusalem. That's where I feel at home." Portman and her family first lived in Washington, D.C., but relocated to Connecticut in 1988 and then moved to Jericho, New York, on Long Island, in 1990.

While living in the Washington, D.C. area, Portman attended Charles E. Smith Jewish Day School in Rockville, Maryland. Portman learned to speak Hebrew while living on Long Island and attended a Jewish elementary school, the Solomon Schechter Day School of Nassau County in Jericho, New York. She graduated from Syosset High School in Syosset, Long Island in 1999. She studied ballet and modern dance at the American Theater Dance Workshop in New Hyde Park, New York, and attended the Usdan Center for the Creative and Performing Arts in Wheatley Heights, both on Long Island. Portman skipped the premiere of her film "," so she could study for her high school final exams.

In 2003, Portman graduated from Harvard University with a Bachelor of Arts (B.A.) degree in psychology. "I don't care if [college] ruins my career," she said in 2002. "I'd rather be smart than a movie star." At Harvard, Portman was Alan Dershowitz's research assistant. While attending Harvard, she was a resident of Lowell House and wrote a letter to the "Harvard Crimson" in response to an essay critical of Israeli actions toward Palestinians.

Portman returned to Israel and took graduate courses at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem in the spring of 2004. In March 2006, she was a guest lecturer at a Columbia University course in terrorism and counterterrorism, where she spoke about her 2006 film, "V for Vendetta". Portman has professed an interest in foreign languages since childhood and has studied French, Japanese, German, and Arabic.

As a student, Portman co-authored two research papers that were published in scientific journals. Her 1998 high school paper, "A Simple Method to Demonstrate the Enzymatic Production of Hydrogen from Sugar", co-authored with scientists Ian Hurley and Jonathan Woodward, was entered in the Intel Science Talent Search. In 2002, she contributed to a study on memory called "Frontal lobe activation during object permanence: data from near-infrared spectroscopy" during her psychology studies at Harvard.

Portman started dancing lessons at age four and performed in local troupes. At the age of 10, a Revlon agent asked her to become a child model, but she turned down the offer to focus on acting. In a magazine interview, Portman said that she was "different from the other kids. I was more ambitious. I knew what I liked and what I wanted, and I worked very hard. I was a very serious kid."

On school holidays, Portman attended theater camps. When she was 10, Portman auditioned for the 1992 off-Broadway show "Ruthless!," a musical about a girl who is prepared to commit murder to get the lead in a school play. Portman and future pop star Britney Spears were chosen as the understudies for star Laura Bell Bundy.

In 1993, she auditioned for the role of an orphan child who befriends a middle-aged hitman (played by Jean Reno) in Luc Besson's film, "." Soon after getting the part, she took her paternal grandmother's maiden name, "Portman", as her stage name in the interest of privacy and to protect her family's identity. "Léon: The Professional" opened in 1994, marking her feature film debut.

During the mid-1990s, Portman had several film roles, including "Heat", "Everyone Says I Love You", and "Mars Attacks!". Her performance in the small ensemble film "Beautiful Girls" garnered significant acclaim.She was the first choice to play Juliet in "William Shakespeare's Romeo + Juliet", but producers felt her age wasn't suitable. In 1997, Portman played the role of Anne Frank in a Broadway adaptation of "The Diary of Anne Frank".

It was after 1996's "Beautiful Girls" that Portman grew reluctant to accept roles where her character was a sexualized youngster. In an interview with "Guardian" feature writer Simon Hattenstone asked if Portman was aware that because of them she was a "paedophile's dream"? Portman nodded a bit uncomfortably, stating that it "dictated a lot of my choices afterwards 'cos it scared me...it made me reluctant to do sexy stuff, especially when I was young".

Also in 1997, Portman was cast as Padmé Amidala in the "Star Wars" prequel trilogy. The first film, "The Phantom Menace", began filming in June 1997 and opened in May 1999. Following production on "The Phantom Menace", she initially turned down a lead role in the film "Anywhere but Here" after learning it would involve a sex scene, but director Wayne Wang and actress Susan Sarandon (who played Portman's mother in the film) demanded a rewrite of the script. Portman was shown a new draft, and she decided to accept the role. The film opened in late 1999, and she received a Golden Globe nomination for Best Supporting Actress for her role as Ann August. Critic Mary Elizabeth Williams of "Salon" called Portman "astonishing" and said that "[u]nlike any number of actresses her age, she's neither too maudlin nor too plucky." She then signed on to play the lead role of a teenage mother in "Where the Heart Is", which opened in April 2000.

After filming "Where the Heart Is", Portman moved into the dorms of Harvard University to pursue her bachelor's degree in psychology. She said in a 1999 interview that, with the exception of the "Star Wars" prequels, she would not act for the next four years in order to concentrate on studying. During the summer break from June to September 2000, Portman filmed "" in Sydney, along with additional production in London.

In July 2001, Portman opened in New York City's Public Theater production of Chekhov's "The Seagull", directed by Mike Nichols; she played the role of Nina alongside Meryl Streep, Kevin Kline, and Philip Seymour Hoffman. The play opened at the Delacorte Theater in Central Park. That same year, she was one of many celebrities who made cameo appearances in the 2001 comedy "Zoolander". Portman was cast in a small role in the film "Cold Mountain".

In 2004, Portman appeared in the independent movies "Garden State" and "Closer". "Garden State" was an official selection of the Sundance Film Festival and won Best First Feature at the Independent Spirit Awards. Her performance as Alice in "Closer" earned her a Supporting Actress Golden Globe as well as a nomination for the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress.

The final "Star Wars" prequel, "", was released on May 19, 2005. The film was the highest grossing domestic film of that year and was voted Favorite Motion Picture at the People's Choice Awards. Also in 2005, Portman filmed "Free Zone" and director Miloš Forman's "Goya's Ghosts". Forman had not seen any of her work but thought she looked like a Goya painting, so he requested a meeting.

Portman hosted live television sketch comedy show "Saturday Night Live" on March 4, 2006. In a SNL Digital Short, she portrays herself as an angry gangsta rapper (with comedian Andy Samberg as her partner in Viking garb) during a faux-interview with comedian Chris Parnell, saying she cheated at Harvard University while high on marijuana and cocaine. The song, titled "Natalie's Rap," was released – alongside other sketches from the show – in 2009 on "Incredibad", an album by the Lonely Island.

"V for Vendetta" opened in early 2006. Portman portrayed Evey Hammond, a young woman who is saved from secret police by anarchist freedom fighter V. Portman worked with a voice coach for the role, learning to speak with an English accent, and she famously had her head shaved.

Portman has commented on "V for Vendetta" political relevance and mentioned that the main character, who recruits Evey to join an underground anti-government group, is "often bad and does things that you don't like" and that "being from Israel was a reason I wanted to do this because terrorism and violence are such a daily part of my conversations since I was little." She said the film "doesn't make clear good or bad statements. It respects the audience enough to take away their own opinion".

Both "Goya's Ghosts" and "Free Zone" received limited releases in 2006. Portman starred in the children's film "Mr. Magorium's Wonder Emporium", which began filming in April 2006 and was released in November 2007; she has said that she was "excited to do a kids' movie." In late 2006, Portman filmed "The Other Boleyn Girl", a historical drama in which she plays Anne Boleyn; Eric Bana and Scarlett Johansson co-starred.

In 2006, she filmed Wong Kar-wai's romantic-drama "My Blueberry Nights". She won acclaim for her role as gambler Leslie, because "[f]or once she's not playing a waif or a child princess but a mature, full-bodied woman... but she's not coasting on her looks … She uses her appeal to simultaneously flirt with and taunt the gambler across the table." Portman voiced Bart Simpson's girlfriend Darcy in the episode "Little Big Girl" of "The Simpsons"' 18th season.

She appeared in Paul McCartney's music video "Dance Tonight" from his 2007 album "Memory Almost Full", directed by Michel Gondry. Portman co-starred in the Wes Anderson short film "Hotel Chevalier", opposite Jason Schwartzman. That same year, she founded the production company, Handsomecharlie Films as a reference to her dog Charlie, who died. In May 2008, Portman served as the youngest member of the 61st Annual Cannes Film Festival jury. Portman's directorial debut, "Eve", opened the 65th Venice International Film Festival's shorts competition in September 2008. The short film, about a young woman who is dragged along on her grandmother's romantic date, was screened out of competition and Portman drew inspiration for the character from her own grandmother. In 2009, she starred opposite Tobey Maguire and Jake Gyllenhaal in the drama film "Brothers", a remake of the 2004 Danish film of the same name. Also in 2009, Portman starred in a commercial called "Greed" directed by Roman Polanski.

Portman played a young ballerina in Darren Aronofsky's 2010 film "Black Swan", a role of which critic Kurt Loder wrote: "Portman gives one of her most compelling performances in this film, which is saying something." To prepare for the role, she went through five to eight hours of dance training each day for six months and lost . In 2011, she won the Golden Globe Award, the Academy Award for Best Actress, and the Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Leading Role.

After Portman's Oscar win, controversy arose over who performed the bulk of the on-screen dancing in "Black Swan". Sarah Lane, one of Portman's dancing doubles in the film, claimed that Portman performed only about five percent of the full-body shots, adding that she was asked by the film's producers not to speak publicly about it during the Oscar season. Director Aronofsky defended Portman by issuing a statement insisting that Portman performed 80 percent of the on-screen dancing in the movie. Portman was trained by professional ballerina Mary Helen Bowers for her role in the film and later wrote the foreword to Bowers' book, "Ballet Beautiful".

Portman co-starred in the 2011 film "No Strings Attached", alongside Ashton Kutcher. She was also an executive producer on the film. She then starred in "Your Highness", opposite James Franco and Danny McBride, and also played the role of Jane Foster in Kenneth Branagh's superhero film adaptation "Thor" and reprised the role in "". In 2010, Portman dropped out of the lead role of Elizabeth Bennet in the novel adaptation, "Pride and Prejudice and Zombies", but served as producer of the finished film, which was released in 2016.

In 2010, Portman signed on with Dior and appeared in several of the company's advertising campaigns. In October 2012, Britain's Advertising Standards Authority banned a Dior advertisement that featured Portman wearing Dior mascara after a complaint from Dior's competitor, L'Oreal. The ASA ruled that the photographs of Portman "misleadingly exaggerated the likely effects of the product".

By February 2012, Portman had signed on for two Terrence Malick projects, "Knight of Cups" and "Song to Song", both initially planned for release within two years. In April 2012, Portman starred in Paul McCartney's music video, "My Valentine", alongside Johnny Depp. Portman also starred in the Western film "Jane Got a Gun".

In July 2013, Portman announced she had chosen an adaptation of Israeli author Amos Oz's autobiographical novel "A Tale of Love and Darkness" as her directorial feature debut. Portman also starred in the film and was a co-writer on the script. "A Tale of Love and Darkness" premiered at the 2015 Cannes Film Festival.

In 2016, Portman played the title role in director Pablo Larrain's "Jackie", a biographical drama about 1960s American First Lady Jacqueline Kennedy, following the death of her husband, President John F. Kennedy. On November 6, 2016, she appeared at the 20th Annual Hollywood Film Awards.

Portman, who is an advocate for animal rights, became a vegetarian when she was eight years old, a decision which came after she witnessed a demonstration of laser surgery on a chicken while attending a medical conference with her father. She became a vegan in 2009 after reading Jonathan Safran Foer's "Eating Animals" and later produced a documentary on factory farming systems in the U.S. by the same title. In September 2017, she was recognized for her work on the film by the Environmental Media Association Awards with the Ongoing Commitment Award. She does not eat animal products or wear fur, feathers, or leather. "All of my shoes are from Target and Stella McCartney", she has said. In 2007, she launched her own brand of vegan footwear.

In 2007, Portman traveled to Rwanda with Jack Hanna, to film the documentary, "Gorillas on the Brink". Later, at a naming ceremony, Portman named a baby gorilla Gukina, which means "to play." Portman has been an advocate of environmental causes since childhood, when she joined an environmental song and dance troupe known as World Patrol Kids. She is also a member of the One Voice movement.

Portman has also supported antipoverty activities. In 2004 and 2005, she traveled to Uganda, Guatemala, and Ecuador as the Ambassador of Hope for FINCA International, an organization that promotes micro-lending to help finance women-owned businesses in developing countries. In an interview conducted backstage at the Live 8 concert in Philadelphia and appearing on the PBS program "Foreign Exchange with Fareed Zakaria", she discussed microfinance. Host Fareed Zakaria said that he was "generally wary of celebrities with fashionable causes", but included the segment with Portman because "she really knew her stuff".

In the "Voices" segment of the April 29, 2007, episode of the ABC Sunday morning program "This Week with George Stephanopoulos", Portman discussed her work with FINCA and how it can benefit women and children in Third World countries. In fall 2007, she visited several university campuses, including Harvard, USC, UCLA, UC Berkeley, Stanford, Princeton, New York University, and Columbia, to inspire students with the power of microfinance and to encourage them to join the Village Banking Campaign to help families and communities lift themselves out of poverty.

Portman is a supporter of the Democratic Party, and in the 2004 presidential race she campaigned for the Democratic nominee, Senator John Kerry. In the 2008 presidential election, Portman supported Senator Hillary Clinton of New York in the Democratic primaries. She later campaigned for the eventual Democratic nominee, Senator Barack Obama of Illinois, during the general election. In a 2008 interview, she also stated: "I even like John McCain. I disagree with his war stance — which is a really big deal — but I think he's a very moral person."

In 2010, Portman's activist work and popularity with young people earned her a nomination for VH1's Do Something Awards, which is dedicated to honoring individuals who do good. In 2011, Portman and her then-fiancé Benjamin Millepied were among the signers of a petition to President Obama in support of same-sex marriage. Portman supported Obama's re-election campaign.

In January 2011, Portman became an ambassador of Free the Children, an international charity and educational partner, spearheading their Power of a Girl campaign. She hosted a contest challenging girls in North America to fundraise for one of Free The Children’s all-girls schools in Kenya. As incentives for the contest winner, she offered her designer Rodarte dress, worn at the red carpet premiere of "Black Swan", along with tickets to her next premiere. Free the Children's all-girls school was also the beneficiary of proceeds from sales of Nude Grege #169, the lipstick Portman designed for Christian Dior. It was announced in May 2012 that Portman would be working with watch designer Richard Mille to develop a limited-edition timepiece with proceeds supporting Free the Children.

In February 2015, Portman was among other alumni of Harvard University including Robert F. Kennedy, Jr, Darren Aronofsky and Susan Faludi who wrote an open letter to the school demanding it divest its $35.9 billion endowment from coal, gas, and oil companies. 

Later that year in May, she spoke at the annual Harvard Class Day to the graduating class of 2015.

In 2006, she commented that she felt more Jewish in Israel and that she would like to raise her children Jewish: "A priority for me is definitely that I'd like to raise my kids Jewish, but the ultimate thing is to have someone who is a good person and who is a partner."

After Portman appeared in the video for folk singer Devendra Banhart's song "Carmensita", the two began a relationship, which ended in September 2008.

Portman began dating French ballet dancer Benjamin Millepied in 2009. The couple met while she was filming "Black Swan", for which he was the choreographer. In December 2010, Portman announced their engagement and confirmed her pregnancy. Portman and Millepied married in a Jewish ceremony in Big Sur, California on August 4, 2012. The couple have two children: son Aleph (born June 2011) and daughter Amalia (born February 2017).

In January 2013, the Paris Opera Ballet announced that Millepied had accepted the position of director of dance, beginning September 2014. The couple subsequently announced plans to relocate to Paris with Portman stating that she would like to become a French citizen. In 2016, the family returned to Los Angeles from Paris.




</doc>
<doc id="5132" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5132" title="Charlize Theron">
Charlize Theron

Charlize Theron ; ; (born 7 August 1975) is a South African and American actress and film producer. She is known for starring in numerous Hollywood films, such as "That Thing You Do!" (1996), "The Devil's Advocate" (1997), "Mighty Joe Young" (1998), "The Cider House Rules" (1999), "The Italian Job" (2003), "Hancock" (2008), "The Road" (2009), "Snow White and the Huntsman" (2012), "Prometheus" (2012), "A Million Ways to Die in the West " (2014), "" (2015), "The Fate of the Furious" (2017), and "Atomic Blonde" (2017).

Theron received critical acclaim for her portrayal of serial killer Aileen Wuornos in "Monster" (2003), for which she won the Academy Award, Silver Bear, Golden Globe Award, and Screen Actors Guild Award for Best Actress among other accolades, becoming the first South African to win an Academy Award in a major acting category. She received Academy Award and Golden Globe Award nominations for her performance in the sexual harassment-themed drama "North Country" (2005), and a Golden Globe Award nomination for her performance in Jason Reitman's film "Young Adult" (2011).

Theron moved into the field of producing in the late 2000s. She founded and owns the production company Denver and Delilah Productions. She has produced numerous films, many of which she had a starring role in, including "The Burning Plain" (2008) and "Dark Places" (2015). Theron became a U.S. citizen in 2007, while retaining her South African citizenship. In 2016, "Time" named her in the annual "Time 100" most influential people list.

Theron was born in Benoni, in the then-Transvaal Province (currently in the Gauteng Province) of South Africa, the only child of Gerda Jacoba Aletta (née Maritz) and Charles Jacobus Theron (born 27 November 1947). Second Boer War figure Danie Theron was her great-great-uncle. She is from an Afrikaner family, and her ancestry includes Dutch, as well as French and German; her French forebears were early Huguenot settlers in South Africa. "Theron" is an Occitan surname (originally spelled Théron) pronounced in Afrikaans as (or ).

She grew up on her parents' farm in Benoni, near Johannesburg. On 21 June 1991, Theron's father, an alcoholic, threatened both teenaged Charlize and her mother while drunk, physically attacking her mother. Theron's mother then shot and killed him. The shooting was legally adjudged to have been self-defence, and her mother faced no charges.

Theron attended Putfontein Primary School (Laerskool Putfontein), a period during which she has said she was not "fitting in." At thirteen, Theron was sent to boarding school and began her studies at the National School of the Arts in Johannesburg. Although Theron is fluent in English, her first language is Afrikaans.

Although seeing herself as a dancer, Theron at 16 won a one-year modelling contract at a local competition in Salerno and with her mother moved to Milan, Italy. After Theron spent a year modelling throughout Europe, she and her mother moved to the US, both New York City and Miami. In New York, she attended the Joffrey Ballet School, where she trained as a ballet dancer until a knee injury closed this career path. As Theron recalled in 2008:

At 19, Theron flew to Los Angeles, on a one-way ticket her mother bought for her, intending to work in the film industry. During the initial months there, she went to a Hollywood Boulevard bank to cash a cheque her mother had sent to help with the rent. When the teller refused to cash it, Theron engaged in a shouting match with him. Upon seeing this, talent agent John Crosby, waiting behind her, handed her his business card and subsequently introduced her to casting agents and also an acting school. She later fired him as her manager after he kept sending her scripts for films similar to "Showgirls" and "Species". After several months in the city, she made her film debut with a non-speaking role in the horror film "" (1995). Her first speaking role was a supporting but significant and attention-garnering part as a hitwoman in "2 Days in the Valley" (1996). Larger roles in widely released Hollywood films followed, and her career expanded in the late 1990s with box-office successes like "The Devil's Advocate" (1997), "Mighty Joe Young" (1998), and "The Cider House Rules" (1999). She was on the cover of the January 1999 issue of "Vanity Fair" as the "White Hot Venus". She also appeared on the cover of the May 1999 issue of "Playboy" magazine, in photos taken several years earlier when she was an unknown model; Theron unsuccessfully sued the magazine for publishing them without her consent.

She starred in five films in 2000: "Reindeer Games", "The Yards", "The Legend of Bagger Vance" and "Men of Honor", "Sweet November" and was briefly considered a new "It girl". Theron has said of this period in her career that, "I kept finding myself in a place where directors would back me but studios didn't. [I began] a love affair with directors, the ones I really, truly admired. I found myself making really bad movies, too. "Reindeer Games" was not a good movie, but I did it because I loved John Frankenheimer."

After appearing in other films, Theron starred as serial killer Aileen Wuornos in "Monster" (2003). Film critic Roger Ebert called it "one of the greatest performances in the history of the cinema". For her role, she won the Academy Award for Best Actress at the 76th Academy Awards in February 2004, as well as the Screen Actors Guild Award and the Golden Globe Award. She is the first South African to win an Oscar for Best Actress. The Oscar win pushed her to "The Hollywood Reporter's" 2006 list of highest-paid actresses in Hollywood, earning US$10 million for both her subsequent films, "North Country" and "Aeon Flux", she ranked seventh, behind Halle Berry, Cameron Diaz, Drew Barrymore, Renée Zellweger, Reese Witherspoon and Nicole Kidman. AskMen also named her the number one most desirable woman of 2003.

In 2005, Theron portrayed Rita, Michael Bluth's (Jason Bateman) love interest, on the third season of Fox's television series "Arrested Development". She also received Golden Globe Award and Primetime Emmy Award nominations for her role of Britt Ekland in the 2004 HBO film "The Life and Death of Peter Sellers". On 30 September, Theron received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame. In the same year, she starred in the financially unsuccessful science fiction thriller "Aeon Flux". She also received the 2005 Spike Video Game Award for Best Performance by a Human Female for her voiceover work in the "Aeon Flux" video game. Theron was listed for the role of Susan Storm in the film "Fantastic Four" (2005).

Theron received Best Actress Academy Award and Golden Globe Award nominations for her lead performance in the drama "North Country". "Ms." magazine also honoured her for this performance with a feature article in its Fall 2005 issue. She was supposed to star in the screen adaption of the short story "The Ice at the Bottom of the World" by Mark Richard, and it was to be directed by Kimberly Peirce and produced by Theron's company Denver and Delilah Productions (named after Theron's two dogs). Theron has owned the rights for many years. She was also supposed to star in a movie adaption of the graphic novel "Jinx", but neither project has been produced yet.

In 2008, Theron was named the Hasty Pudding Theatricals Woman of the Year. That year she also starred with Will Smith in the superhero film "Hancock", and in late 2008 she was asked to be a UN Messenger of Peace by the UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon.

On 4 December 2009, Theron co-presented the draw for the 2010 FIFA World Cup in Cape Town, South Africa, accompanied by several other celebrities of South African nationality or ancestry. During rehearsals she drew an Ireland ball instead of France as a joke at the expense of FIFA, referring to Thierry Henry's handball controversy in the play-off match between France and Ireland. The stunt alarmed FIFA enough for it to fear she might do it again in front of a live global audience.

Following a two-year hiatus from the big screen, Theron returned to the spotlight in 2011 with "Young Adult". Directed by Jason Reitman, the film earned critical acclaim, especially for Theron's performance. She was nominated for a Golden Globe Award and several other awards. Theron then played the Evil Queen Ravenna, Snow White's evil stepmother, in the film "Snow White and the Huntsman", which began production in 2011 and was released in 2012. In 2011, she described her process for becoming the characters in her film:
In 2012, she starred in Ridley Scott's science fiction film "Prometheus". In 2013, Vulture/NYMag named her the 68th Most Valuable Star in Hollywood saying: "We’re just happy that Theron can stay on the list in a year when she didn’t come out with anything … any actress who’s got that kind of skill, beauty, and ferocity ought to have a permanent place in Hollywood."

In 2015, Theron played Libby Day, the lead character in the film adaptation of the Gillian Flynn novel "Dark Places", directed by Gilles Paquet-Brenner. Theron also had a producer credit. The same year, Theron also starred as Imperator Furiosa in "" (2015), opposite Tom Hardy.

Theron reprised her role as Queen Ravenna in the fantasy epic "", a sequel to "Snow White and the Huntsman". The film was released on 22 April 2016. Theron also starred in "The Last Face, Kubo and the Two Strings," and "Brain on Fire".

In 2017, Theron starred in "The Fate of the Furious", where she played Cipher, who is the main antagonist of the entire "The Fast and the Furious" series, and in "Atomic Blonde", an adaptation of the graphic novel "The Coldest City", directed by David Leitch.

The Charlize Theron Africa Outreach Project (CTAOP) was created in 2007 by Theron, who the next year was named a UN Messenger of Peace, in an effort to support African youth in the fight against HIV/AIDS. CTAOP's mission is to help keep African youth safe from HIV/AIDS. The project is committed to supporting community-engaged organizations that address the key drivers of the disease. Although the geographic scope of CTAOP is Sub-Saharan Africa, the primary concentration has mostly been Charlize's home country of South Africa. CTAOP's approach is based on the belief that community-based organizations on the ground understand the social and structural relationships of their communities better than anyone. By supporting these organizations through grant giving, networking, and spotlighting their work, CTAOP enables communities to mobilize and empower themselves to prevent HIV.

In 2008, Theron was named a United Nations Messenger of Peace. In his citation, Ban Ki-Moon said of Theron "You have consistently dedicated yourself to improving the lives of women and children in South Africa, and to preventing and stopping violence against women and girls." She recorded a public service announcement in 2014 as part of their Stop Rape Now program.

In December 2009, CTAOP and TOMS Shoes partnered to create a limited edition unisex shoe. The shoe was made from vegan materials and inspired by the African baobab tree, the silhouette of which was embroidered on blue and orange canvas. Ten-thousand pairs were given to destitute children, and a portion of the proceeds went to CTAOP.

Theron is involved in women's rights organizations and has marched in pro-choice rallies. Theron also is a supporter of animal rights and active member of PETA. She appeared in a PETA ad for its anti-fur campaign.

Theron is a supporter of same-sex marriage and attended a march and rally to support that in Fresno, California, on 30 May 2009. She has publicly stated that she refuses to get married until same sex marriage is legal in the United States. Theron commented on the subject matter, saying: "I don't want to get married because right now the institution of marriage feels very one-sided, and I want to live in a country where we all have equal rights. I think it would be exactly the same if we were married, but for me to go through that kind of ceremony, because I have so many friends who are gays and lesbians who would so badly want to get married, that I wouldn't be able to sleep with myself." Theron further elaborated on her stance in a June 2011 interview on "Piers Morgan Tonight". She stated: "I do have a problem with the fact that our government hasn't stepped up enough to make this federal, to make [gay marriage] legal. I think everybody has that right."

In March 2014, CTAOP was among the charities that benefited from the annual Fame and Philanthropy fundraising event on the night of the 86th Academy Awards. Theron was an honoured guest along with Halle Berry and keynote speaker James Cameron.

In 2015, Theron signed an open letter which the ONE Campaign had been collecting signatures for; the letter was addressed to Angela Merkel and Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma, urging them to focus on women as they serve as the head of the G7 in Germany and the AU in South Africa respectively, which will start to set the priorities in development funding before a main UN summit in September 2015 that will establish new development goals for the generation.

Having signed a deal with John Galliano in 2004, Theron replaced Estonian model Tiiu Kuik as the spokeswoman in the "J'adore" advertisements by Christian Dior. From October 2005 to December 2006, Theron earned US$3 million for the use of her image in a worldwide print media advertising campaign for Raymond Weil watches. In February 2006, she and her corporate entity were sued by Weil for breach of contract. The lawsuit was settled on 4 November 2008.

In 2007, Theron became a naturalized citizen of the United States, while retaining her South African citizenship.

Theron has two children, both adopted. In March 2012, she adopted a boy. In July 2015, she adopted a girl. She lives in Los Angeles.

Theron dated Irish actor Stuart Townsend after meeting him on the set of 2002's "Trapped". The couple lived together in Los Angeles and Ireland. Theron split from Townsend when she came back from a holiday in Mexico in January 2010.

In December 2013, Theron began dating actor Sean Penn. The two announced their engagement in December 2014. Theron ended their relationship in June 2015.
As a child, Theron had suffered from jaundice that caused dental problems. In an interview, she said "[sic] I had no teeth until I was 11. I had these fangs because I had jaundice when I was a kid and I was put on so many antibiotics that my teeth rotted. They had to cut them out. So I never had baby teeth."

While filming "Æon Flux" in Berlin, Germany, Theron suffered a herniated disc in her neck, caused by a fall while filming a series of back handsprings. It required her to wear a neck brace for a month. In July 2009, she was diagnosed with a serious stomach virus, thought to be contracted while overseas. While filming "The Road", Theron injured her vocal cords during the labour screaming scenes.



</doc>
<doc id="12684530" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12684530" title="Jennifer Lawrence">
Jennifer Lawrence

Jennifer Shrader Lawrence (born August 15, 1990) is an American actress. Her films have grossed over $5.5 billion worldwide, and she was the highest-paid actress in the world in 2015 and 2016. She appeared in "Time" 100 most influential people in the world in 2013 and in the "Forbes" Celebrity 100 in 2014 and 2016.

During her childhood, Lawrence performed in church plays and school musicals. When she was 14, a talent scout spotted her in New York City. She then moved to Los Angeles and began her acting career by playing guest roles in television shows. Her first major role came as a main cast member on the sitcom "The Bill Engvall Show" (2007–2009). Lawrence made her film debut in a supporting role in "Garden Party" (2008), and had her breakthrough playing a poverty-stricken teenager in the independent drama "Winter's Bone" (2010). She achieved wider recognition for starring as the mutant Mystique in "" (2011), a role she reprised in later installments of the series.

Lawrence's fame continued to grow with her starring role as Katniss Everdeen in the "Hunger Games" film series (2012–2015), which established her as the highest-grossing action heroine of all time. She went on to earn various accolades for her collaborations with director David O. Russell. Her performance as a depressed and bipolar widow in the romance film "Silver Linings Playbook" (2012) earned her an Academy Award for Best Actress, making her the second-youngest winner of the award. Lawrence subsequently won a BAFTA Award for Best Actress in a Supporting Role for playing a troubled wife in the black comedy "American Hustle" (2013). She also received Golden Globe Awards for her roles in both of these films and for her performance as Joy Mangano in the biopic "Joy" (2015).

Lawrence is known in the media as an advocate for feminism and gender equality. She is the founder of the Jennifer Lawrence Foundation, through which she supports various charitable organizations.

Jennifer Shrader Lawrence was born on August 15, 1990 in Indian Hills, Kentucky, to Gary, a construction worker, and Karen ( Koch), a summer camp manager. She has two older brothers, Ben and Blaine, and her mother brought her up to be "tough" like them. Karen did not allow her daughter to play with other girls in preschool as she deemed her "too rough" with them. The future actress was educated at the Kammerer Middle School in Louisville. She did not enjoy her childhood due to hyperactivity and social anxiety and considered herself a misfit among her peers. Lawrence has said that her anxieties vanished when she performed on stage and acting gave her a sense of accomplishment.

Lawrence's school activities included cheerleading, softball, field hockey and basketball, which she played on a boys' team that was coached by her father. While growing up, she was fond of horseback riding and frequently visited a local horse farm. She has an injured tailbone as a result of being thrown from a horse. Lawrence said that she knew from an early age that she would be famous. When her father worked from home, she performed for him, often dressing up as a clown or ballerina. She had her first acting assignment at age nine when she played the role of a prostitute in a church play that was based on the Book of Jonah. For the next few years, she continued to take parts in church plays and school musicals.

Lawrence was 14 and on a family vacation to New York City when she was spotted on the street by a talent scout who arranged for her to audition for talent agents. Karen was not keen on allowing her daughter to pursue an acting career, but she briefly moved her family to the city to let her read for roles. After Lawrence's first cold reading, the agents said that hers was the best they had heard from someone that young; Lawrence's mother convinced her that they were lying. Lawrence said her early experiences were difficult because she felt lonely and friendless. She signed on with the CESD Talent Agency, who convinced her parents to let her audition for roles in Los Angeles. Lawrence's mother agreed to let her pursue acting on the condition that she graduate from high school. Lawrence was eventually home-schooled in Los Angeles and graduated two years early with good grades. At that time, she considered acting to be a natural fit for her talents, and she turned down several offers for modelling assignments. Between her acting jobs in the city, she made regular visits to Louisville, where she served as an assistant nurse at her mother's camp.

Lawrence began her acting career with a minor role in the television film "Company Town" (2006). She followed it with guest roles in several television shows, including "Monk" (2006) and "Medium" (2007). These parts led to her being cast as a series regular on the TBS sitcom "The Bill Engvall Show", in which she played Lauren, the rebellious teenage daughter of a family living in suburban Louisville, Colorado. The series premiered in 2007 and ran for three seasons. Tom Shales of "The Washington Post" considered her a scene stealer in her part, and David Hinckley of the "New York Daily News" wrote that she was successful in "deliver[ing] the perpetual exasperation of teenage girls". Lawrence won a Young Artist Award for Outstanding Young Performer in a TV Series for the role in 2009.

Lawrence made her film debut in the 2008 drama film "Garden Party", in which she played a troubled teenager named Tiff. She then appeared in director Guillermo Arriaga's feature film debut "The Burning Plain" (2008), a drama narrated in a hyperlink format. She was cast as the teenage daughter of Kim Basinger's character who discovers her mother's extramarital affair—a role she shared with Charlize Theron; both actresses portrayed the role at different stages of the character's life. Mark Feeney for "The Boston Globe" thought of Lawrence's performance as "a thankless task", but Derek Elley from "Variety" praised her as the production's prime asset, writing that she "plumbs fresher depths" into the film. Her performance earned her the Premio Marcello Mastroianni award for Best Emerging Actress at the Venice Film Festival. Also that year, she appeared in the music video for the song "The Mess I Made" by Parachute. The following year, she starred in Lori Petty's drama "The Poker House" as the oldest of three sisters living with a drug-abusing mother. Stephen Farber of "The Hollywood Reporter" thought that Lawrence "has a touching poise on camera that conveys the resilience of children", and her role in "The Poker House" won an Outstanding Performance award from the Los Angeles Film Festival.

Lawrence's breakthrough role came in the small-scale drama "Winter's Bone" (2010), based on Daniel Woodrell's novel of the same name. In Debra Granik's independent feature, she portrayed Ree Dolly, a poverty-stricken teenager in the Ozark Mountains who cares for her mentally ill mother and younger siblings while searching for her missing father. Lawrence traveled to the Ozarks a week before filming began to live with the family on whom the story was based, and in preparation, she learned to fight, skin squirrels, and chop wood. David Denby of "The New Yorker" said the film "would be unimaginable with anyone less charismatic", and Peter Travers of "Rolling Stone" wrote that "her performance is more than acting, it's a gathering storm. Lawrence's eyes are a roadmap to what's tearing Ree apart." The production won the Grand Jury Prize at the Sundance Film Festival. The actress was awarded the National Board of Review Award for Breakthrough Performance, and with her first nomination for the Academy Award for Best Actress, she became the second youngest person to be nominated in the category.

In 2011, Lawrence took on a supporting role in "Like Crazy", a romantic drama about long-distance relationships, starring Anton Yelchin and Felicity Jones. Kenneth Turan of the "Los Angeles Times" considered the film to be an "intensely wrought and immensely satisfying love story" and credited all three performers for "making their [characters'] yearning palpable". She then appeared in Jodie Foster's black comedy "The Beaver" alongside Foster and Mel Gibson. Filmed in 2009, the production was delayed due to controversy concerning Gibson, and earned less than half of its $21 million budget.

After her dramatic role in "Winter's Bone", Lawrence looked for something less serious, and found it with her first high-profile release—Matthew Vaughn's superhero film "" (2011)—a prequel to the "X-Men" film series. She portrayed the shapeshifting mutant Mystique, a role played by Rebecca Romijn in the earlier films. Vaughn cast Lawrence, as he thought that she would be able to portray the weakness and strength involved in the character's transformation. Lawrence lost weight for the part, and for Mystique's blue form had to undergo an eight-hour makeup, as Romijn had done on the other films. She was intimidated in the role as she admired Romijn. Writing for "USA Today", Claudia Puig considered the film to be a "classy re-boot" of the film series, and believed that her "high-spirited performance" empowered the film. With a worldwide gross of $350 million, "X-Men: First Class" became Lawrence's most widely seen film to that point.

In 2012 she played Katniss Everdeen in "The Hunger Games", an adaptation of the first book in author Suzanne Collins' "Hunger Games" trilogy. Set in a post-apocalyptic future, the series tells the story of the teenage heroine Everdeen as she joins rebel forces against a totalitarian government after winning a brutal televised annual event. Despite being an admirer of the books, Lawrence was initially hesitant to accept the part, because of the grand scale of the film. She agreed to the project after her mother convinced her to take the part. She practiced yoga, archery, rock and tree climbing, and hand-to-hand combat techniques for the role. While training for the part, she injured herself running into a wall. The film received generally positive reviews, and Lawrence's portrayal of Everdeen was particularly praised. Todd McCarthy of "The Hollywood Reporter" called her an "ideal screen actress", adding that she embodies the Everdeen of the novel, and believed that she anchored the film "with impressive gravity and presence". Roger Ebert agreed that she was "strong and convincing in the central role". With worldwide revenues of over $690 million, "The Hunger Games" became a top-grossing film featuring a female lead, making Lawrence the highest-grossing action heroine of all time. The success of the film established her as a star.

Later in 2012, Lawrence played a young depressed widow named Tiffany Maxwell in David O. Russell's romance movie "Silver Linings Playbook". The film was an adaptation of the Matthew Quick's novel of the same name. It follows her character finding companionship with Pat Solitano Jr. (played by Bradley Cooper), a man with bipolar disorder. The actress was drawn to her character's complex personality: "She didn't really fit any basic kind of character profile. Somebody who is very forceful and bullheaded is normally very insecure, but she isn't". While Russell initially considered Lawrence to be too young for the part, she convinced him to hire her via a Skype audition. The actress found herself challenged by Russell's spontaneity as a director, and described working on the project as the "best experience of my life". Richard Corliss of "Time" wrote: "Just 21 when the movie was shot, Lawrence is that rare young actress who plays, who "is", grown-up. Sullen and sultry, she lends a mature intelligence to any role." Peter Travers believed that Lawrence "is some kind of miracle. She's rude, dirty, funny, foulmouthed, sloppy, sexy, vibrant, and vulnerable, sometimes all in the same scene, even in the same breath." She won the Golden Globe and Academy Award for Best Actress for her performance in the film, becoming—at age 22—the second youngest Best Actress Oscar winner. Her final release of the year was alongside Max Thieriot and Elisabeth Shue in Mark Tonderai's critically panned thriller "House at the End of the Street".

"The Devil You Know", a small-scale production that Lawrence had filmed for in 2005, was her first release of 2013. She then reprised the role of Everdeen in "", the second installment in the "Hunger Games" film series. While performing the film's underwater stunts, she suffered from an ear infection that resulted in a brief loss of hearing. With box office earnings of $865 million, the film remains her highest-grossing release. Stephanie Zacharek of "The Village Voice" believed that Lawrence's portrayal of Everdeen made her an ideal role model, and wrote that "there's no sanctimony or pretense of false modesty in the way Lawrence plays her". She took on a supporting role in Russell's ensemble crime drama "American Hustle" (2013) as Rosalyn Rosenfeld, the neurotic wife of con man Irving Rosenfeld (portrayed by Christian Bale). Inspired by the Federal Bureau of Investigation's Abscam sting operation, the film is set against the backdrop of political corruption in 1970s New Jersey. Lawrence did little research for the part, and based her performance on knowledge of the era from the films and television shows she had seen. Geoffrey Macnab of "The Independent" praised her as "funny and acerbic", especially for an improvised scene in which she aggressively kisses her husband's mistress (played by Amy Adams) on the lips. Lawrence's performance won her the Golden Globe and BAFTA Award for Best Supporting Actress, in addition to a third Academy Award nomination, her first in the supporting category.

Lawrence played Serena Pemberton in Susanne Bier's depression-era drama "Serena" (2014), based on the novel of the same name by Ron Rash. In the film, she and her husband George (portrayed by Bradley Cooper) are a married couple who become involved in criminal activities after realizing that they cannot bear children. The project was filmed in 2012, and was released in 2014 to poor reviews. Lawrence then reprised the role of Mystique in "", which served as a sequel to both "" (2006) and "X-Men: First Class" (2011). The film received positive reviews and grossed $748.1 million worldwide, becoming the highest-grossing film in the "X-Men" series to that point. Justin Chang of "Variety" praised her look in the film but thought that she had little to do but "glower, snarl and let the f/x artists do their thing". Lawrence's next two releases were in the final parts of "The Hunger Games" film series", " (2014) and "" (2015). For the musical score of the former film, she sang the song "The Hanging Tree", which charted on multiple international singles charts. In a review of the final film in the series, Manohla Dargis of "The New York Times" drew similarities between her rise to stardom and Everdeen's journey as a rebel leader, writing: "Lawrence now inhabits the role as effortlessly as breathing, partly because, like all great stars, she seems to be playing a version of her 'real' self". Both films earned more than $650 million worldwide.
Lawrence worked with Russell for the third time in the biopic "Joy" (2015), in which she plays the eponymous character, a troubled single mother who becomes a successful businessperson after inventing the Miracle Mop. During production in Boston, the press reported on a disagreement between Russell and Lawrence that resulted in a "screaming match". She said that her friendship with Russell made it easier for them to disagree, because people fight when they really love each other. The film was not as well received as their previous collaborations, but her performance was praised. Richard Roeper called her performance her best since "Winter's Bone", "a wonderfully layered performance that carries the film through its rough spots and sometime dubious detours". She won a third Golden Globe Award, and was nominated for another Academy Award for Best Actress, becoming the youngest person to accrue four Oscar nominations. Lawrence began 2016 by providing the narration for "A Beautiful Planet", a documentary film that explores Earth from the International Space Station. She played Mystique for the third time in "" (2016). The film received mixed reviews, with a consensus that it was overfilled with action that detracted from the story's themes and cast's performances. Helen O'Hara from "Empire" considered the film to be a letdown from the previous installments of the series, and criticized the actress for making her character too grim. Despite this, Lawrence was rewarded with Favorite Movie Actress at the 43rd People's Choice Awards.

Lawrence was paid $20 million for playing Aurora Lane in the science fiction film "Passengers" (2016), and she received top-billing over co-star Chris Pratt. It features Pratt and her as two people who wake up 90 years too soon from an induced hibernation on a spaceship bound for a new planet. Critical reaction was negative, with a consensus that the film had a "fatally flawed story", though the chemistry between Lawrence and Pratt was praised. Peter Bradshaw from "The Guardian" believed that "Lawrence is no passenger. She's carrying this thing", but Kwame Opam of "The Verge" considered her character to be of minimal importance. Responding to the criticism of the film, Lawrence said, "I thought the script was beautiful—it was this tainted, complicated love story. It definitely wasn't a failure". By March 2017, Lawrence's films had grossed over $5.5 billion worldwide.

Darren Aronofsky's psychological horror film "Mother!" was Lawrence's sole release of 2017. She starred as a young woman married to a much-older man (played by Javier Bardem), who experiences trauma when her home is invaded by unexpected guests (played by Michelle Pfeiffer and Ed Harris). Lawrence spent three months rehearsing the film in a warehouse in Brooklyn, despite her reluctance to rehearsals in her previous assignments. The intense role proved difficult for her to film; she was put on supplemental oxygen when she hyperventilated one day, and she also dislocated a rib. "Mother!" polarized viewers; it prompted mass walkouts, received the lowest possible CinemaScore rating from viewers, and had the lowest-grossing opening weekend for a wide release in Lawrence's career. The film was better received by critics; Walter Addiego of the "San Francisco Chronicle" labelled it "assaultive" and a "deliberate test of audience endurance", and credited Lawrence for "never allow[ing] herself to be reduced simply to a howling victim".

In March 2018, Lawrence will star as Dominika Egorova, a Russian spy, in the espionage thriller "Red Sparrow" directed by Francis Lawrence. She has committed to star in her fourth "X-Men" film, subtitled "", which is scheduled for release in November 2018. Lawrence and Amy Schumer have written a screenplay for a film in which they will star. She will star in Steven Spielberg's film adaptation of photojournalist Lynsey Addario's memoir "It's What I Do: A Photographer's Life of Love and War", and will feature as Elizabeth Holmes, founder of the Theranos blood testing company, in Adam McKay's film "Bad Blood". Lawrence will also produce a film adaptation of Hannah Kent's novel "Burial Rites" and star as Agnes Magnúsdóttir, the last woman to be executed for murder in Iceland.

While filming "X-Men: First Class" in 2010, Lawrence began a romantic relationship with her co-star Nicholas Hoult. The couple broke up around the time they wrapped "X-Men: Days of Future Past" in 2014. Also that year, she was one of the victims of the iCloud leaks of celebrity photos when nude pictures of her were leaked online. Lawrence emphasized that the images were never meant to go public; she called the leak a "sex crime" and a "sexual violation". She added that viewers of the images should be ashamed of their part in a sexual offense. The actress later stated that her pictures were intended for Hoult, and that unlike other victims of the hack, she did not plan to sue Apple. As of 2014, Lawrence lives in Beverly Hills, California. From September 2016 to October 2017, she was in a relationship with "mother!" director, Darren Aronofsky.
Lawrence is a supporter of Planned Parenthood, and she participated in a June 2017 video against the defunding of the organization. She spoke out against the November 2015 shooting at a Colorado Springs Planned Parenthood clinic. She is a feminist, a concept she argues should not intimidate people "because it just means equality". Lawrence promotes body positivity among women. In 2015, she wrote an essay for the "Lenny Letter" in which she criticized the gender pay gap in Hollywood. She wrote about her own experiences in the industry, such as the lesser salary she received for her work in "American Hustle" compared to her male co-stars. In a 2015 interview with "Vogue", Lawrence criticized Kentucky county clerk Kim Davis for her opposition to same-sex marriage. Lawrence was "raised a Republican", but has subsequently criticized the party's stance on women's rights. She has strongly opposed Donald Trump's presidency, stating in 2015 that his election would "be the end of the world".

Lawrence became a member of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences in 2011. She has lent her support to several charitable organizations, such as the World Food Programme, Feeding America, and the Thirst Project. Along with Josh Hutcherson and Liam Hemsworth, her co-stars of "The Hunger Games" (2012), Lawrence partnered with the United Nations to publicize poverty and hunger. She organized an early screening of "The Hunger Games: Catching Fire" (2013) to benefit Saint Mary's Center, a disabilities organization in Louisville, and raised more than $40,000 for the cause. She partnered with the charity broadcast network Chideo to raise funds for the 2015 Special Olympics World Summer Games by screening her film "Serena" (2014). She also collaborated with Omaze to host a fundraising contest for the games as part of the premiere of "The Hunger Games: Mockingjay – Part 1" (2014).

In 2015, Lawrence teamed with Hutcherson and Hemsworth for "Prank It FWD", a charitable initiative to raise money for the non-profit organization Do Something. That year, she also launched the Jennifer Lawrence Foundation, which supports charities such as the Boys & Girls Clubs of America and the Special Olympics. In 2016, she donated $2 million to the Kosair Children's Hospital in Louisville to set up a cardiac intensive care unit named after her foundation. Lawrence is a board member of Represent.Us, a nonprofit seeking to pass anti-corruption laws in the United States. In 2017, Lawrence joined an Omaze fundraising campaign, through which a winner will be chosen to go wine tasting with her. The following year, she collaborated with 300 women in Hollywood to set up the Time's Up initiative to protect women from harassment and discrimination.

In 2012, the review website IndieWire described Lawrence's personality as "down-to-earth, self-deprecating, [and] unaffected". She is frequently referred to as "America's Sweetheart" in the media. An IGN writer considers her to be a "sharp", "funny" and "quirky" actress who likes to "stay grounded" despite considerable success. Lawrence says that she finds acting "stupid" and does not believe in being "cocky" about her success. As a role model to young people, she tries to be careful with her words.
In 2012, "Rolling Stone" called her "the most talented young actress in America." Her "Hunger Games" co-star Donald Sutherland has favorably compared her craft to that of Laurence Olivier and considers her an "exquisite and brilliant actor". David O. Russell (who directed her in "Silver Linings Playbook", "American Hustle" and "Joy") has praised her effortless acting that makes her performances look easy. During her career, Lawrence has played roles in both high-profile, mainstream productions and low-budget independent films, and has appeared in a range of film genres. She did not study acting and has not been involved in professional theater. She instead bases her acting approach on her observations of people around her.

As her career has developed, Lawrence has become one of the best paid actresses; "The Daily Telegraph" reported in 2014 that she was earning $10 million a film. In 2013, "Time" magazine named her one of the most 100 influential people in the world, "Elle" labeled her the most powerful woman in the entertainment business, and "Forbes" ranked her as the 50th most powerful actress. In 2014, "Forbes" named her the second-highest-paid actress in the world with earnings of $34 million, and cited her as the most powerful actress, ranking at number 12 in the magazine's Celebrity 100 list; she appeared in the list again in 2016. In 2015, Lawrence was named "Entertainer of the Year" by "Entertainment Weekly"—a title she also won in 2012—and was recognized as the highest-grossing action heroine in "Guinness World Records" for starring in the "Hunger Games" series. In 2015 and 2016, "Forbes" reported that she had emerged as the world's highest-paid actress with annual earnings of $52 million and $46 million, respectively. The magazine ranked her as the world's third highest-paid actress in 2017, with earnings of $24 million.

Lawrence appeared in Victoria's Secret's listing of the "Sexiest Up-and-Coming Bombshell" in 2011, "People" Most Beautiful People in 2011 and 2013, "Maxim" Hot 100 from 2011 to 2014, and topped "FHM" sexiest women in the world list in 2014. From 2013 to 2015, she was featured in "Glamour" annual listing of the best dressed women, topping the list in 2014. Lawrence has also been referenced in popular culture, including in the episodes "The Magic Bush" and "Treehouse of Horror XXV" of the television series "South Park" and "The Simpsons", respectively.

Lawrence won an Academy Award for Best Actress for her performance in "Silver Linings Playbook" (2012). She has won three Golden Globe Awards; Best Actress – Comedy or Musical for "Silver Linings Playbook" (2012) and "Joy" (2015), and Best Supporting Actress for "American Hustle" (2013). She also won a BAFTA Award for Best Actress in a Supporting Role for "American Hustle" (2013). Her other accolades include seven MTV Movie Awards (five for "The Hunger Games" series, two for "Silver Linings Playbook"), six People's Choice Awards (three for "The Hunger Games", three for the "X-Men" series), a Satellite Award for "Silver Linings Playbook", and a Saturn Award for "The Hunger Games".




</doc>
<doc id="80696" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=80696" title="Cher">
Cher

Cher (; born Cherilyn Sarkisian; May 20, 1946) is an American singer and actress. Sometimes called the Goddess of Pop, she has been described as embodying female autonomy in a male-dominated industry. She is known for her distinctive contralto singing voice and for having worked in numerous areas of entertainment, as well as adopting a variety of styles and appearances during her six-decade-long career.

Cher gained popularity in 1965 as one-half of the folk rock husband-wife duo Sonny & Cher after their song "I Got You Babe" reached number one on the American and British charts. By the end of 1967, they had sold 40 million records worldwide and had become, according to "Time" magazine, rock's "it" couple. She began her solo career simultaneously, releasing in 1966 her first million-seller song, "Bang Bang (My Baby Shot Me Down)". She became a television personality in the 1970s with her shows "The Sonny & Cher Comedy Hour", watched by over 30 million viewers weekly during its three-year run, and "Cher". She emerged as a fashion trendsetter by wearing elaborate outfits on her television shows.

While working on television, Cher established herself as a solo artist with the U.S. "Billboard" Hot 100 chart-topping singles "Gypsys, Tramps & Thieves", "Half-Breed", and "Dark Lady". After her divorce from Sonny Bono in 1975, she launched a comeback in 1979 with the disco album "Take Me Home" and earned $300,000 a week for her 198082 concert residency in Las Vegas.

In 1982, Cher made her Broadway debut in the play "Come Back to the Five and Dime, Jimmy Dean, Jimmy Dean" and starred in its film adaptation. She subsequently earned critical acclaim for her performances in films such as "Silkwood" (1983), "Mask" (1985), and "Moonstruck" (1987), for which she won the Academy Award for Best Actress. She then revived her musical career by recording the rock-inflected albums "Cher" (1987), "Heart of Stone" (1989), and "Love Hurts" (1991), all of which yielded several successful singles.

Cher reached a new commercial peak in 1998 with the album "Believe", whose title track became the biggest-selling single of all time by a female artist in the UK. It features the pioneering use of Auto-Tune, also known as the "Cher effect". Her 2002–2005 became one of the highest-grossing concert tours of all time, earning $250 million. In 2008, she signed a $180 million deal to headline the Colosseum at Caesars Palace in Las Vegas for three years. After seven years of absence, she returned to film in the 2010 musical "Burlesque". Cher's first studio album in 12 years, "Closer to the Truth" (2013), became her highest-charting solo album in the U.S. when it debuted at number three on the "Billboard" 200.

Cher has won a Grammy Award, an Emmy Award, an Academy Award, three Golden Globe Awards, a Cannes Film Festival Award, and a special CFDA Fashion Award, among several other honors. She has sold 100 million records worldwide to date, becoming one of the best-selling music artists in history. She is the only artist to date to have a number-one single on a "Billboard" chart in each decade from the 1960s to the 2010s. Outside of her music and acting, she is noted for her political views, philanthropic endeavors, and social activism, including LGBT rights and HIV/AIDS prevention.

Cher was born Cherilyn Sarkisian in El Centro, California, on May 20, 1946. Her father, John Sarkisian, was an Armenian-American truck driver with drug and gambling problems; her mother, Georgia Holt (born Jackie Jean Crouch), was an occasional model and bit-part actress who claimed Irish, English, German, and Cherokee ancestry. Cher's father was rarely home when she was an infant, and her parents divorced when Cher was ten months old. Her mother later married actor John Southall, by whom she had another daughter, Georganne, Cher's half-sister.

Now living in Los Angeles, Cher's mother began acting while working as a waitress. She changed her name to Georgia Holt and played minor roles in films and on television. Holt also secured acting parts for her daughters as extras on television shows like "The Adventures of Ozzie and Harriet". Her mother's relationship with Southall ended when Cher was nine years old, but she considers him her father and remembers him as a "good-natured man who turned belligerent when he drank too much". Holt remarried and divorced several more times, and she moved her family around the country (including New York, Texas, and California). They often had little money, and Cher recounted having had to use rubber bands to hold her shoes together. At one point, her mother left Cher at an orphanage for several weeks. Although they met every day, both found the experience traumatic.

When Cher was in fifth grade, she produced a performance of the musical "Oklahoma!" for her teacher and class. She organized a group of girls, directing and choreographing their dance routines. Unable to convince boys to participate, she acted the male roles and sang their songs. By age nine, she had developed an unusually low voice. Fascinated by film stars, Cher's role model was Audrey Hepburn, particularly due to her role in the 1961 film "Breakfast at Tiffany's". Cher began to take after the unconventional outfits and behavior of Hepburn's character. She was disappointed by the absence of dark-haired Hollywood actresses whom she could emulate then. She had wanted to be famous since childhood but felt unattractive and untalented, later commenting, "I couldn't think of anything that I could do ... I didn't think I'd be a singer or dancer. I just thought, well, I'll be famous. That was my goal."

In 1961, Holt married bank manager Gilbert LaPiere, who adopted Cher (under the name Cheryl LaPiere) and Georganne, and enrolled them at Montclair College Preparatory School, a private school in Encino, whose students were mostly from affluent families. The school's upper-class environment presented a challenge for Cher; biographer Connie Berman wrote, "[she] stood out from the others in both her striking appearance and outgoing personality." A former classmate commented, "I'll never forget seeing Cher for the first time. She was so special ... She was like a movie star, right then and there ... She said she was going to be a movie star and we knew she would." Despite not being an excellent student, Cher was intelligent and creative, according to Berman. She earned high grades, excelling in French and English classes. As an adult, she discovered that she had dyslexia. Cher achieved notoriety for her unconventional behavior: she performed songs for students during the lunch hours and surprised peers when she wore a midriff-baring top. She later recalled, "I was never really in school. I was always thinking about when I was grown up and famous."

At age 16, Cher dropped out of school, left her mother's house, and moved into Los Angeles with a friend. She took acting classes and worked to support herself, dancing in small clubs along Hollywood's Sunset Strip and introducing herself to performers, managers, and agents. According to Berman, "[Cher] did not hesitate to approach anyone she thought could help her get a break, make a new contact, or get an audition." Cher met performer Sonny Bono in November 1962 when he was working for record producer Phil Spector. Cher's friend moved out, and Cher accepted Sonny's offer to be his housekeeper. Sonny introduced Cher to Spector, who used her as a backup singer on many recordings, including the Ronettes' "Be My Baby" and the Righteous Brothers' "You've Lost That Lovin' Feelin'". Spector produced her first single, the commercially unsuccessful "Ringo, I Love You", which Cher recorded under the name Bonnie Jo Mason.

Cher and Sonny became close friends, eventual lovers, and performed their own unofficial wedding ceremony in a hotel room in Tijuana, Mexico, on October 27, 1964. Although Sonny had wanted to launch Cher as a solo artist, she encouraged him to perform with her because she suffered from stage fright, and he began joining her onstage, singing the harmonies. Cher disguised her nervousness by looking at Sonny; she later commented that she sang to the people through him. In late 1964, they emerged as a duo called Caesar & Cleo, releasing the poorly received singles "Do You Wanna Dance?", "Love Is Strange", and "Let the Good Times Roll".

Cher signed with Liberty Records' Imperial imprint in the end of 1964, and Sonny became her producer. The single "Dream Baby", released under the name "Cherilyn", received airplay in Los Angeles. Encouraged by Imperial, Cher worked with Sonny on her second solo single on the label, a cover version of Bob Dylan's "All I Really Want to Do", which peaked at number 15 on the U.S. "Billboard" Hot 100 in 1965. Meanwhile, the Byrds had released their own version of the same song. When competition on the singles charts started between Cher and the Byrds, the group's record label began to promote the B-side of the Byrds' single. Roger McGuinn of the Byrds commented, "We loved the Cher version ... We didn't want to hassle. So we just turned our record over." Cher's debut album, "All I Really Want to Do" (1965), reached number 16 on the "Billboard" 200; it was later described by AllMusic's Tim Sendra as "one of the stronger folk-pop records of the era".

In early 1965, Caesar and Cleo began calling themselves Sonny & Cher. Following the recording of "I Got You Babe", they traveled to England in July 1965 at the Rolling Stones' advice; Cher recalled, "[they] had told us ... that Americans just didn't get us and that if we were going to make it big, we were going to have to go to England." According to writer Cintra Wilson, "English newspaper photographers showed up when S&C were thrown out of the London Hilton [because of their outfits] the night they arrived—literally overnight, they were stars. London went gaga for the heretofore-unseen S&C look, which was neither mod nor rocker."

"I Got You Babe" reached number one on the "Billboard" Hot 100 chart and became, according to AllMusic's Bruce Eder, "one of the biggest-selling and most beloved pop/rock hits of the mid-'60s"; "Rolling Stone" listed it among "The 500 Greatest Songs of All Time" in 2003. As the song knocked the Beatles off the top of the British charts, English teenagers began to emulate Sonny and Cher's fashion style, such as bell-bottoms, striped pants, ruffled shirts, industrial zippers and fur vests. Upon their return to the U.S., the duo made several appearances on the teen-pop showcases "Hullabaloo" and "Shindig!" and completed a tour of some of the largest arenas in the U.S. Their shows attracted Cher look-alikes—"girls who were ironing their hair straight and dyeing it black, to go with their vests and bell-bottoms". Cher expanded her creative range by designing a clothing line.

Sonny and Cher's first album, "Look at Us" (1965), released for the Atco Records division of Atlantic Records, spent eight weeks at number two on the "Billboard" 200, behind the Beatles' "Help!". Their material became popular, and the duo successfully competed with the dominant British Invasion and Motown sounds of the era. Sonny and Cher charted ten "Billboard" top 40 singles between 1965 and 1972, including five top-ten singles: "I Got You Babe", "Baby Don't Go", "The Beat Goes On", "All I Ever Need Is You", and "A Cowboy's Work Is Never Done". At one point, they had five songs in the top 50 at the same time, a feat equaled only by the Beatles and Elvis Presley. By the end of 1967, they had sold 40 million records worldwide and had become, according to "Time" magazine's Ginia Bellafante, rock's "it" couple.

Cher's following releases kept her solo career fully competitive with her work with Sonny. "The Sonny Side of Chér" (1966) features "Bang Bang (My Baby Shot Me Down)", which reached number two in America and became her first million-seller solo single. "Chér", also released in 1966, contains the Burt Bacharach and Hal David composition "Alfie", which was added to the credits of the American version of the 1966 film of the same name and became the first stateside version of the popular song. "With Love, Chér" (1967) includes songs described by biographer Mark Bego as "little soap-opera stories set to rock music" such as the U.S. top-ten single "You Better Sit Down Kids".

By the end of the 1960s, Sonny and Cher's music had ceased to chart. According to Berman, "the heavy, loud sound of groups like Jefferson Airplane and Cream made the folk-rock music of Sonny and Cher seem too bland." Cher later commented, "I loved the new sound of Led Zeppelin, Eric Clapton, the electric-guitar oriented bands. Left to myself, I would have changed with the times because the music really turned me on. But Son[ny] didn't like it—and that was that." Their monogamous lifestyle during the period of the sexual revolution and the anti-drug position they adopted at the height of the drug culture eventually made the duo lose their popular appeal among American youths. According to Bego, "in spite of their revolutionary unisex clothes, Sonny and Cher were quite 'square' when it came to sex and drugs." In an attempt to recapture their young audience, the duo produced and starred in the film "Good Times" (1967), which was commercially unsuccessful.

Cher's next album, "Backstage" (1968), in which she runs in diverse musical directions, including Brazilian jazz and anti-war protest settings, was not a commercial success. In 1969, she was dropped from Imperial Records. Sonny and Cher had been dropped from Atco; however, the label wanted to sign Cher for a solo album. "3614 Jackson Highway" (1969) was recorded without the guidance of Sonny and incorporates experiments in soul music; AllMusic's Mark Deming proclaimed it "the finest album of her career". Displeased with the "3614 Jackson Highway" album, Sonny prevented Cher from releasing more recordings for Atco.

Meanwhile, Sonny dated others, and by the end of the 1960s their relationship had begun to unravel. According to "People" magazine, "[Sonny] tried desperately to win her back, telling her he wanted to marry and start a family." They officially married after she gave birth on March 4, 1969 to Chastity Bono (who later became Chaz Bono).

That year, the duo spent $500,000 and mortgaged their home to make the film "Chastity". Written and directed by Sonny, who did not appear in the movie, it tells the story of a young woman, played by Cher, searching for the meaning of life. The art film failed commercially, putting the couple $190,000 in debt with back taxes. However, some critics noted that Cher showed signs of acting potential; "Cue" magazine wrote, "Cher has a marvelous quality that often makes you forget the lines you are hearing."

At the lowest point of their career, the duo put together a nightclub routine that relied on a more adult approach to sound and style. According to writer Cintra Wilson, "Their lounge act was so depressing, people started heckling them. Then Cher started heckling back. Sonny ... reprimanded her; then she'd heckle Sonny". The heckling became a highlight of the act and attracted viewers. Television executives took note, and the couple began making guest appearances on prime-time shows, in which they presented a "new, sophisticated, and mature" image. Cher adopted alluring, low-cut gowns that became her signature outfits.

CBS head of programming Fred Silverman offered Sonny and Cher their own television program after he noticed them as guest-hosts on "The Merv Griffin Show" in 1971. "The Sonny & Cher Comedy Hour" premiered as a summer replacement series on August 1, 1971, and had six episodes. Because it was a ratings success, the couple returned that December with a full-time show.

Watched by more than 30 million viewers weekly during its three-year run, "The Sonny & Cher Comedy Hour" was praised for the comedic timing, and deadpan Cher mocked Sonny about his looks and short stature. According to Berman, they "exuded an aura of warmth, playfulness, and caring that only enhanced their appeal. Viewers were further enchanted when a young Chastity also appeared on the show. They seemed like a perfect family." Cher honed her acting skills in sketch comedy roles such as the brash housewife Laverne, the sardonic waitress Rosa, and historical vamps, including Cleopatra and Miss Sadie Thompson. The Bob Mackie designed clothing Cher wore was part of the show's attraction, and her style influenced the fashion trends of the 1970s.

In 1971, Sonny and Cher signed with the Kapp Records division of MCA Records, and Cher released the single "Classified 1A", in which she sings from the point of view of a soldier who bleeds to death in Vietnam. Written by Sonny, who felt that her first solo single on the label had to be poignant and topical, the song was rejected by radio station programmers as uncommercial.

Since Sonny's first attempts at reviving their recording career as a duo had also been unsuccessful, Kapp Records recruited Snuff Garrett to work with them. He produced Cher's first U.S. solo number-one single, "Gypsys, Tramps & Thieves", which "proved that ... Garrett knew more about Cher's voice and her persona as a singer than Sonny did", writes Bego. "Billboard" called it "one of the 20th century's greatest songs". It was featured on the 1971 album "Chér" (eventually reissued under the title "Gypsys, Tramps & Thieves"), which was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA). Its second single, "The Way of Love", reached number seven on the "Billboard" Hot 100 chart and established Cher's more confident image as a recording artist.

In 1972, Cher released the all-ballad set "Foxy Lady", demonstrating the evolution of her vocal abilities, according to Bego. Following the release of the album, Garrett quit as producer after disagreeing with Sonny about the kind of material Cher should record. At Sonny's insistence, in 1973 Cher released an album of standards called "Bittersweet White Light", which was commercially unsuccessful. That year, lyricist Mary Dean brought Garrett "Half-Breed", a song about the daughter of a Cherokee mother and a white father, that she had written especially for Cher. Although Garrett did not have Cher as a client at the time, he was convinced that "it's a smash for Cher and for nobody else", so he held the song for months until he got Cher back. "Half-Breed" was featured on the album of the same name and became Cher's second U.S. solo number-one single. Both the album and the single were certified gold by the RIAA. Cher's third U.S. solo number-one single was "Dark Lady", in 1974, from the namesake album. Later that year, she released a "Greatest Hits" album that, according to "Billboard" magazine, proved her to be "one of the most consistent hitmakers of the past five years", as well as a "proven superstar who always sells records".

Between 1971 and 1973, Sonny and Cher's recording career was revived with four albums released under Kapp Records and MCA Records: "Sonny & Cher Live" (1971), "All I Ever Need Is You" (1972), "Mama Was a Rock and Roll Singer, Papa Used to Write All Her Songs" (1973), and "Live in Las Vegas Vol. 2" (1973). Cher later commented on this period: "I could do a whole album ... in three days ... We were on the road ... and we were doing the Sonny & Cher Show".

Cher and Sonny had marital problems since late 1972, but appearances were maintained until 1974. "The public still thinks we are married," Sonny wrote in his diary at the time, "[and] that's the way it has to be." In February 1974, Sonny filed for a separation, citing "irreconcilable differences". A week later, Cher countered with a divorce suit and charged Sonny with "involuntary servitude", claiming that he withheld money from her and deprived her of her rightful share of their earnings. The couple battled in court over finances and the custody of Chastity, which was eventually granted to Cher. Their divorce was finalized on June 26, 1975.

In 1974, Cher won the Golden Globe Award for Best Actress – Television Series Musical or Comedy for "The Sonny & Cher Comedy Hour". The same year, Sonny premiered a solo show on ABC, "The Sonny Comedy Revue", which carried the creative team behind the Sonny and Cher show. It was canceled after 13 weeks.

During the divorce proceedings, Cher had a two-year romantic relationship with record executive David Geffen, who freed her from her business arrangement with Sonny, under which she was required to work exclusively for Cher Enterprises, the company he ran. Geffen secured a $2.5 million deal for Cher with Warner Bros. Records, and she began work on her first album under that label in 1975. According to Bego, "it was their intention that [this album] was going to make millions of fans around the world take her seriously as a rock star, and not just a pop singer."

Despite Cher's efforts to develop her musical range by listening to artists such as Stevie Wonder, Elton John, James Taylor, Carly Simon, Joni Mitchell, and Bob Dylan, the resulting album "Stars" was commercially and critically unsuccessful. Janet Maslin of "The Village Voice" wrote, "Cher is just no rock and roller ... Image, not music, is Cher Bono's main ingredient for both records and TV." The album has since become a cult classic and is generally considered among her best work.

On February 16, 1975, Cher returned to television with a solo show on CBS. Called "Cher", it began as a highly rated special with guests Flip Wilson, Elton John, and Bette Midler. The show was produced by Geffen and centered on Cher's songs, monologues, comedy performance, and her variation of clothing, which was the largest for a weekly TV show. Early critical reception was favorable; the "Los Angeles Times" exclaimed that "Sonny without Cher was a disaster. Cher without Sonny, on the other hand, could be the best thing that's happened to weekly television this season." "Cher" lasted for less than a year, replaced by a new show in which she professionally reunited with ex-husband Sonny; she said, "doing a show alone was more than I could handle."

On June 30, 1975, four days after finalizing her divorce from Sonny, Cher married rock musician Gregg Allman, co-founder of The Allman Brothers Band. She filed for divorce nine days later because of his heroin and liquor problems, but they reconciled within a month. They had one son, Elijah Blue, on July 10, 1976. Sonny and Cher's TV reunion, "The Sonny and Cher Show", debuted on CBS in February 1976—the first show ever to star a divorced couple. Although the show was a ratings success on its premiere, Cher and Sonny's insulting onscreen banter about their divorce, her reportedly extravagant lifestyle, and her troubled relationship with Allman caused a public backlash that eventually contributed to the show's cancellation in August 1977.

Cher's next albums, "I'd Rather Believe in You" (1976) and "Cherished" (1977), the latter a return to her pop style at Warner's producers' insistence, were commercially unsuccessful. In 1977, under the rubric "Allman and Woman", she recorded alongside Allman the duet album "Two the Hard Way". Their relationship ended following the release of the album, and their divorce was finalized in 1979. Beginning in 1978, she had a two-year live-in relationship with Kiss member Gene Simmons. That year, she legally changed her name from Cherilyn Sarkisian La Piere Bono Allman to Cher, to eliminate the use of four surnames. She returned to prime time television with the specials "Cher... Special" (1978) and "Cher ... and Other Fantasies" (1979).

A single mother with two children, Cher realized that she had to make a choice about the direction of her singing career. Deciding to temporarily abandon her desire to be a rock singer, she signed with Casablanca Records and launched a comeback with the single "Take Me Home" and the album of the same name, both of which capitalized on the disco craze. Both the album and the single became instant successes, remained bestsellers for more than half of 1979, and were certified gold by the RIAA. Sales of the album may have been boosted by the image of a scantily clad Cher in a Viking outfit on its cover. Despite her initial lack of enthusiasm for disco music, she changed her mind after the success, commenting, "I never thought I would want to do disco ... [but] it's terrific! It's great music to dance to. I think that danceable music is what everybody wants."

Encouraged by the popularity of "Take Me Home", Cher planned to return to rock music in her next album, "Prisoner" (1979). The album's cover features Cher draped in chains as a "prisoner of the press", which caused controversy among feminist groups for her perceived portrayal of a sex slave. She included rock songs, which made the disco release seem unfocused and led to its commercial failure. "Prisoner" produced the single "Hell on Wheels", featured on the soundtrack of the film "Roller Boogie". The song exploits the late 1970s roller-skating fad and contributed to its popularity.

In 1980, alongside Italian record producer Giorgio Moroder, Cher wrote her last Casablanca disco recording, "Bad Love", for the film "Foxes". She formed the rock band Black Rose that year with her then-lover, guitarist Les Dudek. Although Cher was the lead singer, she did not receive top billing because she wanted to create the impression that all band members were equal. Since she was easily recognized when she performed with the band, she developed a punk look by cutting her trademark long hair. Despite appearances on television, the band failed to earn concert dates. Their album "Black Rose" received unfavorable reviews; Cher told "Rolling Stone", "The critics panned us, and they didn't attack the record. They attacked me. It was like, 'How dare Cher sing rock & roll?'" During the band's active period, Cher was simultaneously doing a concert residency in Las Vegas, earning $300,000 a week. Its companion television special "Cher ... A Celebration at Caesars" aired on Lifetime in April 1983. Black Rose disbanded in 1981. That year, she released a duet with musician Meat Loaf called "Dead Ringer for Love", which reached number five on the UK Singles Chart and was later described by AllMusic's Donald A. Guarisco as "one of the more inspired rock duets of the 1980s". In 1982, Columbia Records released the album "I Paralyze", later deemed by Bego as Cher's "strongest and most consistent solo album in years" despite its low sales.

With decreasing album sales and a lack of commercially successful singles, Cher decided to further develop her acting career. While she had previously aspired to venture into film, she had only the critically and commercially unsuccessful movies "Good Times" and "Chastity" to her credit, and the Hollywood establishment did not take her seriously as an actress. She moved to New York in 1982 to take acting lessons with Lee Strasberg, founder of the Actors Studio, but never enrolled after her plans changed. She auditioned for and was signed by director Robert Altman for the Broadway stage production "Come Back to the Five and Dime, Jimmy Dean, Jimmy Dean", playing a member of a James Dean fan club holding a 20-year reunion. That year, Altman cast her again in the film adaptation of the same title. Cher credits Altman for launching her acting career: "Without Bob [Robert Altman] I would have never had a film career. Everyone told him not to cast me ... I am convinced that Bob was the only one who was brave enough to do it."

Director Mike Nichols, who had seen Cher onstage in "Jimmy Dean", offered her the part of Dolly Pelliker, a plant co-worker and Meryl Streep's lesbian roommate in the film "Silkwood". When it premiered in 1983, audiences questioned Cher's ability as an actress. She recalls attending a film preview during which the audience laughed when they saw her name in the credits. For her performance, Cher won the Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actress – Motion Picture.

In 1985, Cher formed the film production company Isis. Her next film, "Mask" (1985), reached number two at the box office and was Cher's first critical and commercial success as a leading actress. For her role as a drug addict biker with a teenage son who has a severe physical deformity, she won the Cannes Film Festival Award for Best Actress. During the making of the film, however, she clashed with director Peter Bogdanovich. She attended the 58th Academy Awards in a tarantula-like costume "to show her scorn for the 'system'", according to authors James Parish and Michael Pitts. The incident garnered her much publicity.

By 1987, Cher was receiving attention for her controversial lifestyle, including her tattoos, plastic surgeries, exhibitionist fashion sense, and affairs with younger men. She had romantic relationships with actors Val Kilmer, Eric Stoltz, and Tom Cruise, hockey player Ron Duguay, film producer Josh Donen, Bon Jovi guitarist Richie Sambora, and Rob Camilletti, an 18-years-younger bagel baker whom she dated from 1986 to 1989.

Cher starred in three films in 1987. In "Suspect", she played a public defender who is both helped and romanced by one of the jurors in the homicide case she is handling. Along with Susan Sarandon and Michelle Pfeiffer, she starred as one of three divorcees involved with a mysterious and wealthy visitor from hell who comes to a small New England town in the comedy horror "The Witches of Eastwick". In Norman Jewison's romantic comedy "Moonstruck", she played an Italian widow in love with her fiancé's younger brother. The two latter films ranked among the top ten highest-grossing films of 1987, at number ten and five, respectively. For her performance in "Moonstruck", Cher won the Academy Award for Best Actress and the Golden Globe Award for Best Actress – Motion Picture Comedy or Musical. By 1988, Cher had become one of the most bankable actresses of the decade, commanding $1 million per film. That year, she released the fragrance Uninhibited, which earned about $15 million in its first year sales.

In 1987, Cher signed with Geffen Records and revived her musical career with what music critics Johnny Danza and Dean Ferguson describe as "her most impressive string of hits to date", establishing her as a "serious rock and roller ... a crown that she'd worked long and hard to capture". Michael Bolton, Jon Bon Jovi, Desmond Child, and Richie Sambora produced her first Geffen album, "Cher", which was certified platinum by the RIAA. It features the rock ballad "I Found Someone", her first U.S. top-ten single in more than eight years.

Cher's 19th studio album "Heart of Stone" (1989) was certified triple platinum by the RIAA. The music video for its second single, "If I Could Turn Back Time", caused controversy due to Cher's performance on a Navy warship, straddling a cannon, and wearing a leather thong that revealed her tattooed buttocks. The song topped the Australian charts for seven weeks, reached number three on the "Billboard" Hot 100 chart and became one of Cher's most successful singles. Other songs from "Heart of Stone" to reach the U.S. top ten were "After All", a duet with Peter Cetera, and "Just Like Jesse James". At the 1989 People's Choice Awards, Cher won the Favorite All-Around Female Star Award. She embarked on the Heart of Stone Tour in 1990. Most critics liked the tour's nostalgic nature and admired Cher's showmanship. Its parent television special "" (1991) was filmed during a concert in Las Vegas.

In her first film in three years, "Mermaids" (1990), Cher paid tribute to her own mother in this story about a woman who moves her two daughters from town to town at the end of a love affair. She conflicted with the film's first two directors, Lasse Hallström and Frank Oz, who were replaced by Richard Benjamin. Believing Cher would be the star attraction, the producers allowed her creative control for the film. "Mermaids" was a moderate box office success and received mixed reviews. One of the two songs Cher recorded for the film's soundtrack, "The Shoop Shoop Song (It's in His Kiss)", topped the UK Singles Chart for five weeks.

Cher's final studio album for Geffen Records, "Love Hurts" (1991), stayed at number one in the UK for six weeks and produced the UK top-ten single "Love and Understanding". The album was certified gold by the RIAA. In later years, Cher commented that her Geffen label "hit years" had been especially significant to her, "because I was getting to do songs that I really loved ... songs that really represented me, and they were popular!" She released the exercise book "Forever Fit" in 1991, followed by the 1992 fitness videos "" and "". She embarked on the Love Hurts Tour during 1992. That year, the UK-only compilation album "" peaked at number one in the country for seven weeks. It features three new songs: "Oh No Not My Baby", "Whenever You're Near", and "Many Rivers to Cross".

Partially due to her experiences filming "Mermaids", Cher turned down leading roles in such films as "The War of the Roses" and "Thelma & Louise". According to Berman, "After the success of "Moonstruck", she was so worried about her next career move that she was overly cautious." In the early 1990s, she contracted the Epstein–Barr virus and developed chronic fatigue syndrome, which left her too exhausted to sustain her music and film careers. Because she needed to earn money and was not healthy enough to work on other projects, she starred in infomercials launching health, beauty, and diet products, which earned her close to $10 million in fees. The skits were parodied on "Saturday Night Live" and critics considered them a sellout, many suggesting her film career was over. She told "Ladies' Home Journal", "Suddenly I became the Infomercial Queen and it didn't occur to me that people would focus on that and strip me of all my other things."

Cher made cameo appearances in the Robert Altman films "The Player" (1992) and "Prêt-à-Porter" (1994). In 1994, she started a mail-order catalogue business, "Sanctuary", selling Gothic-themed products, and contributed a rock version of "I Got You Babe" to MTV's animated series "Beavis and Butt-head". Alongside Chrissie Hynde, Neneh Cherry, and Eric Clapton, she topped the UK Singles Chart in 1995 with the charity single "Love Can Build a Bridge". Later that year, she signed with Warner Music UK's label WEA and released the album "It's a Man's World" (1995), which came out of her idea of covering men's songs from a woman's point of view. In general, critics favored the album and its R&B influences, some saying her voice had improved. Stephen Holden of "The New York Times" wrote that "From an artistic standpoint, this soulful collection of grown-up pop songs ... is the high point of her recording career." "It's a Man's World" reached number 10 on the UK Albums Chart and spawned the UK top-ten single "One by One". Tracks were remixed for the American release of the album, abandoning its original rock sound in favor of a style more accessible to U.S. radio; it reached number 64 on the "Billboard" 200.

In 1996, Cher played the wife of a businessman who hires a hitman to murder her in the Chazz Palminteri-scripted dark comedy film "Faithful". Although the film received negative reviews from critics, Cher was praised for her role; "The New York Times" Janet Maslin wrote that she "does her game best to find comic potential in a victim's role." Cher refused to promote the film, claiming it was "horrible". She made her directing debut with a segment in the abortion-themed anthology "If These Walls Could Talk" (1996), in which she starred as a doctor murdered by an anti-abortion fanatic. It drew the highest ratings for an original HBO movie to date, registering an 18.7 rating with a 25 share in HBO homes and attracting 6.9 million viewers. Her music played a large role in the American TV series "The X-Files" episode "The Post-Modern Prometheus", which aired in November 1997. Written for her, it tells the story of a scientist's grotesque creature who adores Cher because of her role in "Mask", in which her character cares for her disfigured son.

Following Sonny Bono's death in a skiing accident in 1998, Cher delivered a tearful eulogy at his funeral, calling him "the most unforgettable character" she had met. She paid tribute to him by hosting the CBS special "Sonny & Me: Cher Remembers", which aired on May 20, 1998. That month, Sonny and Cher received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame for Television. Later that year, Cher published "The First Time", a collection of autobiographical essays of "first-time" events in her life, which critics praised for revealing the singer to be down to earth and genuine. Although the manuscript was almost finished when Sonny died, she could not decide whether to include his death in the book; she feared being criticized for capitalizing on the event. She later told "Rolling Stone", "I couldn't ignore it, could I? I might have if I cared more about what people think than what I know is right for me." 

Cher's 22nd studio album "Believe" (1998) marked a musical departure for her, as it comprises dance-pop songs, many of which capture the "disco-era essence"; Cher said, "It's not that I think this is a '70s album ... but there's a thread, a consistency running through it that I love.'" "Believe" was certified quadruple platinum by the RIAA and went on to be certified gold or platinum in 39 countries, selling 10 million copies worldwide. The album's title track reached number one in more than 23 countries and sold over 10 million copies worldwide. It became the best-selling recording of 1998 and 1999, respectively, in the UK and the U.S., and Cher's most successful single to date. "Believe" topped the UK Singles Chart for seven weeks and became the biggest-selling single of all time by a female artist in the UK, selling over 1.7 million copies in the country as of November 2013. It also topped the "Billboard" Hot 100 chart for four weeks, selling over 1.8 million units in the U.S. as of December 1999. The song earned Cher the Grammy Award for Best Dance Recording.

On January 31, 1999, Cher performed "The Star-Spangled Banner" at the Super Bowl XXXIII. Two months later, she sang on the television special "VH1 Divas Live 2", which attracted 19.4 million viewers. According to VH1, it was the most popular, and most watched program in the television network's history, as Cher's presence was "a huge part of making it exactly that." Capitalizing on the success of "Believe", Cher's former record company Geffen Records released the compilation album "" (1999), which features the previously unreleased song "Don't Come Cryin' to Me". It was certified gold by the RIAA. The Do You Believe? tour ran from 1999 to 2000 and was sold out in every American city it was booked in, amassing a global audience of more than 1.5 million. Its companion television special, "Cher: Live in Concert – From the MGM Grand in Las Vegas" (1999), was the highest rated original HBO program in 1998–99, registering a 9.0 rating among adults 18 to 49 and a 13.0 rating in the HBO universe of about 33 million homes. In November 1999, Cher released the compilation album "The Greatest Hits", which sold three million copies outside of the U.S. as of January 2000.

Cher was named the number-one dance artist of 1999 by "Billboard". At the 1999 World Music Awards, she received the Legend Award for her "lifelong contribution to the music industry". Her next film, Franco Zeffirelli's "Tea with Mussolini" (1999), got mixed reviews, but she earned critical acclaim for her performance as a rich, flamboyant American socialite whose visit to Italy is not welcome among the Englishwomen; one reviewer from "Film Comment" wrote, "It is only after she appears that you realize how sorely she's been missed from movie screens! For Cher is a star. That is, she manages the movie star trick of being at once a character and at the same time never allowing you to forget: that's Cher."

"Not.com.mercial" (2000) was written mostly by Cher after she had attended a songwriters' conference in 1994; it marked her first attempt at writing most of the tracks for an album. As the album was rejected by her record label for being uncommercial, she chose to sell it only on her website. In the song "Sisters of Mercy", she criticized as "cruel, heartless and wicked" the nuns who prevented her mother from retrieving her from a Catholic orphanage. The Catholic church denounced the song.

Cher's highly anticipated dance-oriented follow-up to "Believe", "Living Proof" (2001), entered the "Billboard" 200 at number nine and was certified gold by the RIAA. The album includes the UK top-ten single "The Music's No Good Without You" and "Song for the Lonely", the latter song dedicated to "the courageous people of New York" following the September 11 attacks. In May 2002, she performed during the benefit concert "VH1 Divas Las Vegas". At the 2002 "Billboard" Music Awards, she won the Dance/Club Play Artist of the Year Award and was presented with the Artist Achievement Award by Steven Tyler for having "helped redefine popular music with massive success on the "Billboard" charts". That year, her wealth was estimated at $600 million.

In June 2002, Cher embarked on the , announced as the final live concert tour of her career, although she vowed to continue making records and films. The show highlighted her successes in music, television, and film, featuring video clips from the 1960s onwards and an elaborate backdrop and stage set-up.

Initially scheduled for 49 shows, the worldwide tour was extended several times. By October 2003, it had become the most successful tour ever by a woman, grossing $145 million from 200 shows and playing to 2.2 million fans. A collection of live tracks taken from the tour was released in 2003 as the album "Live! The Farewell Tour". The NBC special "Cher – The Farewell Tour" (2003) attracted 17 million viewers. It was the highest rated network-TV concert special of 2003 and earned Cher the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Variety, Music, or Comedy Special.

After leaving Warner UK in 2002, Cher signed a worldwide deal with the U.S. division of Warner Bros. Records in September 2003. "The Very Best of Cher" (2003), a greatest-hits collection that surveys her entire career, peaked at number four on the "Billboard" 200 and was certified double platinum by the RIAA. She played herself in the Farrelly brothers comedy "Stuck on You" (2003), mocking her public image as she appears in bed with a much younger boyfriend. Her 326-date Farewell Tour ended in 2005 as one of the highest-grossing concert tours of all time, seen by over 3.5 million fans and earning $250 million. In 2008, she began a three-year, 200-performance residency at the Colosseum at Caesars Palace, Las Vegas, for which she earned a reported $60 million per year. Titled Cher, the production featured state-of-the-art video and special effects, elaborate set designs, 14 dancers, four aerialists and more than 20 costume changes.

Cher returned to film in the 2010 musical "Burlesque", playing a nightclub impresario whom a young Hollywood hopeful is looking to impress. One of the two songs she recorded for the film's soundtrack, the power ballad "You Haven't Seen the Last of Me", reached number one on the "Billboard" Dance Club Songs chart in January 2011, making Cher the only artist to date to have a number-one single on a "Billboard" chart in each decade from the 1960s to the 2010s. In November 2010, she received the honor of placing her handprints and footprints in cement in the courtyard in front of Grauman's Chinese Theatre in Hollywood. The next year, she lent her voice to Janet the Lioness in the comedy "Zookeeper". "Dear Mom, Love Cher", a documentary she produced about her mother Georgia Holt, aired on Lifetime in May 2013.

"Closer to the Truth", Cher's 25th studio album and the first since 2001's "Living Proof", entered the "Billboard" 200 at number three in October 2013, her highest position on that chart to date. Michael Andor Brodeur from "The Boston Globe" commented that "Cher's 'Goddess of Pop' sash remains in little danger of undue snatching; at 67, she sounds more convincing than J-Lo or Madonna reporting from 'the club'". Cher premiered the lead single "Woman's World" on the season four finale of the talent show "The Voice", her first live TV performance in over a decade. She later joined the show's season five as judge Blake Shelton's team adviser.

On June 30, 2013, Cher headlined the annual Dance on the Pier benefit, celebrating Gay Pride day. It became the event's first sellout in five years. In November 2013, she appeared as a guest performer and judge on the seventeenth season of ABC's "Dancing with the Stars", during its eighth week, which was dedicated to her. She embarked on the Dressed to Kill Tour in March 2014, nearly a decade after announcing her "farewell tour". She quipped about that fact during the shows, saying this would actually be her last farewell tour while crossing fingers. The tour's first leg, which included 49 sold-out shows in North America, grossed $54.9 million. In November 2014, she cancelled all remaining dates due to an infection that affected kidney function.

On May 7, 2014, Cher confirmed a collaboration with American hip hop group Wu-Tang Clan on their album "Once Upon a Time in Shaolin". Credited as Bonnie Jo Mason, she uses an alias of hers originated in 1964. Only one copy of the album has been produced, and it was sold by online auction in November 2015. After appearing as Marc Jacobs' guest at the 2015 Met Gala, Cher posed for his brand's fall/winter advertising campaign. The fashion designer stated, "This has been a dream of mine for a very, very long time."

Cher first mentioned plans for a Broadway musical based on her life and music in June 2012. At that time, she revealed that the show would feature three actresses playing herself during different stages of her life. By 2015, she was still working on the project, enlisting writer Rick Elice to develop the script. In late 2016, it was announced Jason Moore had signed on to direct, while Flody Suarez and Jeffrey Seller would serve as producers.
Billed as "The Cher Show", a staged reading was workshopped in New York City from January 2–14, 2017.

Classic Cher, a series of shows in cooperation with AEG Live, will see her perform 30 live concerts in the newly built Park Theater at Monte Carlo Resort and Casino and The Theater at MGM National Harbor. Opening night was on February 8, 2017. At the 2017 "Billboard" Music Awards, Cher performed "Believe" and "If I Could Turn Back Time", her first awards show performance in more than 15 years, and was presented with the "Billboard" Icon Award by Gwen Stefani, who called her "a role model for showing us how to be strong and true to ourselves [and] the definition of the word Icon."

Cher has employed various musical styles, including folk rock, pop rock, power ballads, disco, new wave music, rock music, punk rock, arena rock, and hip hop; she said she has done this to "remain relevant and do work that strikes a chord". Her music has mainly dealt with themes of heartbreak, independence, and self-empowerment for women; by doing so, she became "a brokenhearted symbol of a strong but decidedly single woman", according to "Out" magazine's Judy Wieder. "Goldmine" magazine's Phill Marder credited Cher's "nearly flawless" song selection as what made her a notorious rock singer; while several of her early songs were penned by or sung with Sonny Bono, most of her solo successes, which outnumbered Sonny and Cher's successes, were composed by independent songwriters, selected by Cher. "Not.com.mercial" (2000), the singer's first album mostly written by herself, presents a "1970s singer-songwriter feel" that proves "Cher adept in the role of storyteller", according to AllMusic's Jose F. Promis.

Robert Hilburn of the "Los Angeles Times" writes, "There were a lot of great records by female singers in the early days of rock ... None, however, reflected the authority and command that we associate with rock 'n' roll today as much as [Cher's] key early hits". Some of Cher's early songs discuss subjects rarely addressed in American popular music such as divorce, prostitution, unplanned and underaged pregnancy, and racism. According to AllMusic's Joe Viglione, the 1972 single "The Way of Love" is "either about a woman expressing her love for another woman, or a woman saying au revoir to a gay male she loved" ("What will you do/When he sets you free/Just the way that you/Said good-bye to me"). Her ability to carry both male and female ranges allowed her to sing solo in androgynous and gender-neutral songs.

Cher has a contralto singing voice, described by author Nicholas E. Tawa as "bold, deep, and with a spacious vibrato". Ann Powers of "The New York Times" called it "a quintessential rock voice: impure, quirky, a fine vehicle for projecting personality." AllMusic's Bruce Eder wrote that the "tremendous intensity and passion" of Cher's vocals coupled with her "ability to meld that projection with her acting skills" can provide "an incredibly powerful experience for the listener", despite her having a limited vocal range. Paul Simpson, in his book "The Rough Guide to Cult Pop" (2003), posits that "Cher [is] the possessor of one of the huskiest, most distinctive voices in pop ... which can work wonders with the right material directed by the right producer". He further addresses the believability of her vocal performances: "she spits out the words ... with such conviction you'd think she was delivering an eternal truth about the human condition".

Writing about Cher's musical output during the 1960s, Robert Hilburn of the "Los Angeles Times" stated that "Rock was subsequently blessed with the staggering blues exclamations of Janis Joplin in the late '60s and the raw poetic force of Patti Smith in the mid-'70s. Yet no one matched the pure, seductive wallop of Cher". By contrast, her vocal performances during the 1970s were described by Eder as "dramatic, highly intense ... [and] almost as much 'acted' as sung". First heard in the 1980 record "Black Rose", Cher employed sharper, more aggressive vocals in her hard rock-oriented albums, establishing her sexually confident image. For the 1995 album "It's a Man's World", she restrained her vocals, singing in higher registers and without vibrato.

The 1998 song "Believe" has an electronic vocal effect proposed by Cher, and was the first commercial recording to feature Auto-Tune—an audio processor originally intended to disguise or correct off-key inaccuracies in vocal music recordings—as a deliberate creative effect. After the success of the song, the technique became known as the "Cher effect" and has since been widely used in popular music. Cher continued to use Auto-Tune on the albums "Living Proof" (2001) and "Closer to the Truth" (2013).

In an interview in 2013, Cher reflected on how her voice had evolved during the course of her career, eventually getting stronger and suppler over the years. While she didn't really like it at the beginning, working with vocal coaches had made a significant difference; she stated in the "Toronto Sun": "It's so freaky because people my age are having to lose notes and I'm gaining notes, so that's pretty shocking."

Author Yvonne Tasker, in her book "Working Girls: Gender and Sexuality in Popular Cinema" (2002), notes that Cher's film roles often mirrors her public image as a rebellious, sexually autonomous, and self-made woman. In her films, she recurrently serves as a social intermediary to disenfranchised male characters, such as Eric Stoltz's elephantiasis victim in "Mask" (1985), Liam Neeson's mute homeless veteran in "Suspect" (1987), and Nicolas Cage's socially isolated baker with a wooden hand in "Moonstruck" (1987). Film critic Kathleen Rowe wrote of "Moonstruck" that the depiction of Cher's character as "a 'woman on top' [is] enhanced by the unruly star persona Cher brings to the part'. Jeff Yarbrough of "The Advocate" wrote that Cher was "one of the first superstars to 'play gay' with compassion and without a hint of stereotyping", as she portrays a lesbian in the 1983 film "Silkwood".

Cher's public image is also reflected in her music videos and live performances, in which she "repeatedly comments on her own construction, on her search for perfection and on the performance of the female body", wrote Tasker. Unlike other music video and stage acts of that time who often featured female backers who would mimic the singer's performance, Cher uses a male dancer dressed as her in the 1992 concert video "Cher at the Mirage"; Author Diane Negra commented, "In authorizing her own quotation, Cher acknowledges herself as fictionalized production, and proffers to her audience a pleasurable plurality." James Sullivan of the "San Francisco Chronicle" wrote that "Cher is well aware that her chameleonic glitz set the stage for the current era of stadium-size razzle-dazzle. She's comfortable enough to see such imitation as flattery, not theft."

Cher was ranked 17th on VH1's list of the "50 Greatest Women of the Video Era". The 1980 video for "Hell on Wheels" involves cinematic techniques and was one of the first music videos ever. Deemed "controversial" for her performance on a Navy warship, straddling a cannon, and wearing a leather thong that revealed her tattooed buttocks, the 1989 music video for "If I Could Turn Back Time" was the first ever to be banned by MTV.

"Time" magazine's Cady Lang described Cher as a "cultural phenomenon [who] has forever changed the way we see celebrity fashion." Cher emerged as a fashion trendsetter in the 1960s, popularizing "hippie fashion with bell-bottoms, bandanas, and Cherokee-inspired tunics". She began working as a model in 1967 for photographer Richard Avedon after then-"Vogue" magazine editor Diana Vreeland discovered her at a party for Jacqueline Kennedy that year. Avedon took the controversial photo of Cher in a beaded and feathered nude gown for the cover of "Time" magazine in 1975. Through her 1970s television shows, she became a sex symbol with her inventive and revealing Bob Mackie-designed outfits, and fought the network censors to bare her navel. Although Cher has been erroneously attributed to being the first woman to expose her navel on television, she was the most prominent to do so since the establishment of the American Code of Practices for Television Broadcasters in 1951, which prompted network censors to ban navel exposure on U.S. television. "People" dubbed Cher the "pioneer of the belly beautiful". In 1972, after she was featured on the annual "Best Dressed Women" lists, Mackie stated: "There hasn't been a girl like Cher since Dietrich and Garbo. She's a high-fashion star who appeals to people of all ages."

In May 1999, after the Council of Fashion Designers of America recognized Cher with an award for her influence in fashion, Robin Givhan of the "Los Angeles Times" called her a "fashion visionary" for "striking just the right note of contemporary wretched excess". Givhan referenced Tom Ford, Anna Sui and Dolce & Gabbana as "[i]nfluential designers [who] have evoked her name as a source of inspiration and guidance." She concluded that "Cher's Native American showgirl sexpot persona now seems to epitomize the fashion industry's rush to celebrate ethnicity, adornment and sex appeal." "Vogue" proclaimed Cher "[their] favorite fashion trendsetter" and wrote that "[she] set the grounds for pop stars and celebrities today", describing her as "[e]ternally relevant [and] the ruler of outré reinvention". Alexander Fury of "The Independent" lauded Cher as "the ultimate fashion icon" and traced her influence among female celebrities such as Beyoncé, Jennifer Lopez, and Kim Kardashian, stating that "[t]hey all graduated from the Cher school of never sharing the stage, with anyone, or anything ... They're trying to share the spotlight, to have Cher's success."

Cher has attracted media attention for her physical appearance—particularly her youthful looks and her tattoos. Journalists have often called her the "poster girl" of plastic surgery. Author Grant McCracken, in his book "Transformations: Identity Construction in Contemporary Culture" (2008), draws a parallel between Cher's plastic surgeries and the transformations in her career: "Her plastic surgery is not merely cosmetic. It is hyperbolic, extreme, over the top ... Cher has engaged in a transformational technology that is dramatic and irreversible." Caroline Ramazanoglu, author of "Up Against Foucault: Explorations of Some Tensions Between Foucault and Feminism" (1993), wrote that "Cher's operations have gradually replaced a strong, decidedly 'ethnic' look with a more symmetrical, delicate, 'conventional' ... and ever-youthful version of female beauty ... Her normalised image ... now acts as a standard against which other women will measure, judge, discipline and 'correct' themselves."

Cher has six tattoos. "The Baltimore Sun" called her the "Ms. Original Rose Tattoo". She got her first tattoo in 1972. According to Sonny Bono, "Calling her butterfly tattoos nothing was like ignoring a sandstorm in the Mojave. That was exactly the effect Cher wanted to create. She liked to do things for the shock they created. She still does. She'll create some controversy and then tell her critics to stick it." In the late 1990s, she began having laser treatments to remove her tattoos. The process was still underway in the 2000s. She commented, "When I got tattooed, only bad girls did it: me and Janis Joplin and biker chicks. Now it doesn't mean anything. No one's surprised." In 1992, Madame Tussauds wax museum honored Cher as one of the five "most beautiful women of history" by creating a life-size statue. She was ranked 26th on VH1's list of the "100 Sexiest Artists" published in 2002.

Cher's presence on social media has drawn analysis from journalists. "Time" named her "Twitter's most outspoken (and beloved) commentator". "The New York Times" writer Jenna Wortham commended Cher on her social media usage, saying "Most celebrities' social-media feeds feel painfully self-aware and thirsty ... In her own way, Cher is an outlier, perhaps the last unreconstructed high-profile Twitter user to stand at her digital pulpit and yell (somewhat) incomprehensibly, and be rewarded for it. Online, authenticity and originality are often carefully curated myths. Cher thrives on a version of nakedness and honesty that is rarely celebrated in the public eye." Monica Heisey of "The Guardian" called Cher's Twitter profile "a jewel in the bizarro crown of the internet", and stated, "While many celebrities use Twitter for carefully crafted self-promotion, Cher just lets it all hang out."

Cher's primary philanthropic endeavors have included support of health research and patients' quality of life, anti-poverty initiatives, veterans rights, and vulnerable children.

The Cher Charitable Foundation supports international projects such as the Intrepid Fallen Heroes Fund, Operation Helmet, and the Children's Craniofacial Association.

Beginning in 1990, Cher served as a donor and as the National Chairperson and Honorary Spokesperson for the Children's Craniofacial Association, whose mission is to "empower and give hope to facially disfigured children and their families". The annual Cher's Family Retreat is held each June to provide craniofacial patients, their siblings and parents an opportunity to interact with others who have endured similar experiences. She supports and promotes Get A-Head Charitable Trust, which aims to improve the quality of life for people with head and neck diseases.

Cher is a donor, fundraiser, and international spokesperson for Keep a Child Alive, an organization that seeks to accelerate action to combat the AIDS pandemic, including the provision of antiretroviral medicine to children and their families with HIV/AIDS. In 1996, she hosted the American Foundation for AIDS Research (amfAR) Benefit alongside Elizabeth Taylor at the Cannes Film Festival. In 2015, she received the amfAR Award of Inspiration for "her willingness and ability to use her fame for the greater good" and for being "one of the great champions in the fight against AIDS".

Cher has been a vocal supporter of American soldiers and returning veterans. She has contributed resources to Operation Helmet, an organization that provides free helmet upgrade kits to troops in Iraq and Afghanistan. She has contributed to the Intrepid Fallen Heroes Fund, which serves military personnel who have been disabled in operations in Iraq and Afghanistan, and those severely injured in other operations. In 1993, she participated in a humanitarian effort in Armenia, taking food and medical supplies to the war-torn region.

Cher has engaged in the construction of houses with Habitat for Humanity and served as the Honorary National Chair of a Habitat's elimination of poverty housing initiative "Raise the Roof", an effort to engage artists in the organization's work while on tour. In 2007, she became the primary supporter of the Peace Village School (PVS) in Ukunda, Kenya, which "provides nutritious food, medical care, education and extracurricular activities for more than 300 orphans and vulnerable children, ages 2 to 13 years." Her support enabled the school to acquire land and build permanent housing and school facilities, and in partnership with Malaria No More and other organizations, she piloted an effort to eliminate malaria mortality and morbidity for the children, their caregivers and the surrounding community. In 2016, after the discovery of lead contamination in the drinking water of Flint, Michigan, Cher donated more than 180,000 bottles of water to the city as part of a partnership with Icelandic Glacial.

Cher's older child, Chaz Bono (born Chastity Bono), first came out as a lesbian at age 17, which reportedly caused Cher to feel "guilt, fear and pain". However, she soon came to accept Chaz's sexual orientation, and came to the conclusion that LGBT people "didn't have the same rights as everyone else, [and she] thought that was unfair". She was the keynote speaker for the 1997 national Parents, Families, & Friends of Lesbians and Gays (PFLAG) convention, and has since become one of the LGBT community's most vocal advocates. In May 1998, she received the GLAAD Vanguard Award for having "made a significant difference in promoting equal rights for lesbians and gay men". On June 11, 2009, Chaz came out as a transgender man, and his transition from female to male was legally finalized on May 6, 2010.

Cher has said that she is not a registered Democrat, but has attended many Democratic conventions and events. Over the years, Cher's political views have attracted media attention, and she has been an outspoken critic of the conservative movement. In an interview with "Vanity Fair", she was critical of a variety of political topics, including Republican politicians like Sarah Palin and Jan Brewer. She has commented that she did not understand why anyone would be a Republican because eight years under the administration of George W. Bush "almost killed [her]".

During the 2000 United States presidential election, ABC News wrote that she was determined to do "whatever possible to keep him [Bush] out of office". She told the site, "If you're black in this country, if you're a woman in this country, if you are any minority in this country at all, what could possibly possess you to vote Republican? ... You won't have one fucking right left." She added, "I don't like Bush. I don't trust him. I don't like his record. He's stupid. He's lazy."

On October 27, 2003, Cher anonymously called a C-SPAN phone-in program to recount a visit she made to maimed soldiers at the Walter Reed Army Medical Center and criticized the lack of media coverage and government attention given to injured servicemen. She remarked that she watches C-SPAN every day. Although she identified herself as an unnamed entertainer, she was recognized by the C-SPAN host, who subsequently questioned her about her 1992 support for independent presidential candidate Ross Perot. She said, "When I heard him talk right in the beginning, I thought that he would bring some sort of common-sense business approach and also less partisanship, but then ... I was completely disappointed like everyone else when he just kind of cut and run and no one knew exactly why ... Maybe he couldn't have withstood all the investigation that goes on now".

On Memorial Day weekend in 2006, Cher called into C-SPAN's "Washington Journal" endorsing Operation Helmet, a group that provides helmets to help soldiers avoid head injuries while in the war zone. On June 14, 2006, she made a guest appearance on C-SPAN with Dr. Bob Meaders, the founder of Operation Helmet. That year, in an interview with "Stars and Stripes", she explained her "against the war in Iraq but for the troops" position: "I don't have to be for this war to support the troops because these men and women do what they think is right. They do what they're told to do. They do it with a really good heart. They do the best they can. They don't ask for anything."

Cher supported Hillary Clinton in her 2008 presidential campaign. After Obama won the Democratic nomination, she supported his candidacy on radio and TV programs. However, in a 2010 interview with "Vanity Fair", she commented that she "still thinks Hillary would have done a better job", although she "accepts the fact that Barack Obama inherited insurmountable problems". During the 2012 United States presidential election, Cher and comedian Kathy Griffin released a public service announcement titled "Don't Let Mitt Turn Back Time on Women's Rights". In the PSA, the pair criticized Republican presidential nominee Mitt Romney for his support of Richard Mourdock, the U.S. Senate candidate who suggested that pregnancies resulting from rape were "part of God's plan".

In September 2013, Cher declined an invitation to perform at the 2014 Winter Olympics opening ceremony in Russia due to the country's controversial anti-gay legislation that overshadowed preparations for the event. In June 2015, after Donald Trump announced his candidacy for president, she made a series of critical comments on Twitter, stating that "Donald Trump's punishment is being Donald Trump".

According to "Goldmine" magazine's Phill Marder, Cher "has been and remains today one of the Rock Era's most dominant figures". He described her as the leader of an effort in the 1960s to "advance feminine rebellion in the rock world [and] the prototype of the female rock star, setting the standard for appearance, from her early hippie days to her later outlandish outfits, and her attitude—the perfect female punk long before punk even was a rock term." According to Jeff Miers from "The Buffalo News", "Her music has changed with the times over the decades, rather than changing those times through groundbreaking work"; however, he felt that subsequent female singers such as Cyndi Lauper, Christina Aguilera, Lady Gaga, and Madonna, whom he calls "her generation's Cher", were heavily inspired by Cher's abilities to combine "showmanship with deep musicality ... to make valid statements in a wide variety of trend-driven idioms ... to ease effortlessly between pop subgenres [and] to shock without alienating her fans", as well as by her charismatic stage presence and the strong LGBT support among her fan base. "Billboard"'s Keith Caulfield wrote that "There's divas, and then there's Cher." She is commonly referred to by the media as the "Goddess of Pop."

Cher has repeatedly reinvented herself through various personas, for which Professor Richard Aquila from Ball State University called her "the ultimate pop chameleon". "The New York Times" declared Cher as the "Queen of the Comeback". According to author Lucy O'Brien, "Cher adheres to the American Dream of reinvention of self: 'Getting old does not have to mean getting obsolete.'"

Author Craig Crawford, in his book "The Politics of Life: 25 Rules for Survival in a Brutal and Manipulative World" (2007), describes Cher as "a model of flexible career management", and relates her career successes to a constant reshaping of her image according to the evolving trends of popular culture. He further explains that she billed "each dramatic turnaround of style as another example of rebellion—an image that allowed her to make calculated changes while appearing to be consistent." Author Grant McCracken stated, "The term 'reinvention' is now often used to talk about the careers of American celebrities. But in Cher's case, it is particularly apt [because she] is inclined to lock on to each new fashion wave [and] is swept violently down the diffusion stream and out of fashion. Only substantial re-creation permits her to return to stardom." Her "integrity" and "perseverance" are highlighted in the "Reaching Your Goals" book series of illustrated inspirational stories for children, in which her life is detailed emphasizing the importance of self-actualization: "For years, Cher worked hard to become a successful singer. Then she worked hard to become an actress. Even when she needed money, she turned down movie roles that weren't right for her. Her goal has always been to be a good actress, not just a rich and famous one."

Cher's "ability to forge an immensely successful and lengthy career as a woman in a male-dominated entertainment world" has drawn attention from feminist critics. According to author Diane Negra, Cher was presented in the beginning of her career as a product of male creativity; Cher remembers, "It was a time when girl singers were patted on the head for being good and told not to think". However, her image eventually changed due to her "refusal of dependence on a man and the determination not only to forge a career (as an actor) on her own terms but to refuse the conventional role assigned to women over forty years old in an industry that fetishises youth", wrote author Yvonne Tasker. She was featured in the 16th-anniversary edition of "Ms." magazine as an "authentic feminist hero" and a 1980s role model for women: "Cher, the straightforward, tattooed, dyslexic single mother, the first Oscar winner to have entered into matrimony with a known heroin addict and to have admitted to being a fashion victim by choice, has finally landed in an era that's not afraid to applaud real women."

Stephanie Brush from "The New York Times" wrote, following the telecast of Cher's Oscar win in 1988, that she "performs the function for women moviegoers that Jack Nicholson has always fulfilled for men. Free of the burden of ever having been America's sweetheart, she is the one who represents us [women] in our revenge fantasies, telling all the fatheads ... exactly where they can go. You need to be more than beautiful to get away with this. You need to have been Cher for 40 years."

Alec Mapa of "The Advocate" elaborates: "While the rest of us were sleeping, Cher's been out there for the last four decades living out every single one of our childhood fantasies ... Cher embodies an unapologetic freedom and fearlessness that some of us can only aspire to." "Rolling Stone" Jancee Dunn wrote, "Cher is the coolest woman who ever stood in shoes. Why? Because her motto is, 'I don't give a shit what you think, I'm going to wear this multicolored wig.' There are folks all over America who would, in their heart of hearts, love to date people half their age, get multiple tattoos and wear feathered headdresses. Cher does it for us." Alexander Fury of "The Independent" wrote that Cher "represents a seemingly immortal, omnipotent, uni-monikered level of fame." Bego stated: "No one in the history of show business has had a career of the magnitude and scope of Cher's. She has been a teenage pop star, a television hostess, a fashion magazine model, a rock star, a pop singer, a Broadway actress, an Academy Award-winning movie star, a disco sensation, and the subject of a mountain of press coverage."

Throughout her solo career, Cher has sold 100 million records worldwide, becoming one of the best-selling music artists of all time. She is the only artist to date to have a number-one single on a "Billboard" chart in each decade from the 1960s to the 2010s.

She has held U.S. "Billboard" Hot 100 number-one singles over the longest period of time in history: 33 years, seven months and three weeks between "I Got You Babe", which topped the chart for the first time on August 14, 1965, and "Believe", whose last week at number one was April 3, 1999. With "Believe", she became the oldest female artist to have a U.S. number-one song in the rock era, at the age of 52. "Billboard" ranked her at number 43 on their "Greatest Hot 100 Artists of All Time" list. In 2014, the magazine listed her as the 23rd highest-grossing touring act since 1990, with total earned revenue of $351.6 million and 4.5 million attendance at her shows.

In 2003, Cher appeared at number 41 on VH1's list of "The 200 Greatest Pop Culture Icons", which recognizes "the folks that have significantly inspired and impacted American society". She was ranked 31st on VH1's list of "The 100 Greatest Women in Music", based on the period 1992–2012. "Esquire" magazine placed her at number 44 on their list of "The 75 Greatest Women of All Time". In a 2001 poll, "Biography" magazine ranked her as their third favorite leading actress of all time, behind Audrey Hepburn and Katharine Hepburn. She was featured on the "100 Greatest Movie Stars of our Time" list compiled by "People". She is one of the few artists to win three of the four major American entertainment awards (EGOT—Emmy, Grammy, Oscar, and Tony), and one of five actor-singers to have had a U.S. number-one single and won an acting Academy Award.


Tours

Residencies


Notes



</doc>
<doc id="16553" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16553" title="Julia Roberts">
Julia Roberts

Julia Fiona Roberts (born October 28, 1967) is an American actress and producer. She became a Hollywood star after headlining the romantic comedy "Pretty Woman" (1990), which grossed $464 million worldwide. She has won three Golden Globe Awards (out of eight nominations) and has been nominated for four Academy Awards for her film acting, winning the Academy Award for Best Actress for her performance in "Erin Brockovich" (2000).

Her films have collectively brought box office receipts of over US$2.8 billion, making her one of the most successful actresses in terms of box office receipts. Her most successful films include "Mystic Pizza" (1988), "Steel Magnolias" (1989), "Pretty Woman" (1990), "Sleeping with the Enemy" (1991), "The Pelican Brief" (1993), "My Best Friend's Wedding" (1997), "Notting Hill" (1999), "Runaway Bride" (1999), "Ocean's Eleven" (2001), "Ocean's Twelve" (2004), "Charlie Wilson's War" (2007), "Valentine's Day" (2010), "Eat Pray Love" (2010),"Money Monster" (2016), and "Wonder" (2017). Roberts received the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Limited Series or Movie nomination for her performance in the HBO television film "The Normal Heart" (2014).

Roberts was the highest-paid actress in the world throughout most of the 1990s and in the first half of the 2000s. Her fee for 1990's "Pretty Woman" was US$300,000; in 2003, she was paid an unprecedented $25 million for her role in "Mona Lisa Smile" (2003). As of 2007 Roberts's net worth was estimated to be $140 million. She has been named "People" magazine's "World's Most Beautiful Woman" a record five times.

Roberts was born on October 28, 1967, in Smyrna, Georgia, to Betty Lou Bredemus (1934–2015) and Walter Grady Roberts (1933–1977). She is of English, Scottish, Irish, Welsh, German, and Swedish descent. Her father was a Baptist, her mother a Roman Catholic, and she was raised Catholic. Her older brother, Eric Roberts, from whom she was estranged until 2004, sister Lisa Roberts Gillan, and niece Emma Roberts, are also actors.

Roberts' parents, one-time actors and playwrights, met while performing in theatrical productions for the armed forces. They later co-founded the Atlanta Actors and Writers Workshop in Atlanta, off Juniper Street in Midtown. They ran a children's acting school in Decatur, Georgia, while they were expecting Julia. The children of Martin Luther King, Jr. and Coretta Scott King attended the school; Walter Roberts was their daughter Yolanda Denise King's acting coach. As a thank-you for his service, Mrs. King paid Mrs. Roberts's hospital bill when Julia was born.

Her parents married in 1955. Her mother filed for divorce in 1971; the divorce was finalized in early 1972. From 1972, Roberts lived in Smyrna, Georgia, where she attended Fitzhugh Lee Elementary School, Griffin Middle School, and Campbell High School. In 1972, her mother married Michael Motes, who was abusive and often unemployed; Roberts despised him. The couple had a daughter, Nancy Motes, who died at 37 on February 9, 2014, of an apparent drug overdose. The marriage ended in 1983, with Betty Lou divorcing Motes on cruelty grounds; she had stated that marrying him was the biggest mistake of her life. Roberts's own father died of cancer when she was ten.

Roberts wanted to be a veterinarian as a child. She also played the clarinet in her school band. After graduating from Smyrna's Campbell High School, she attended Georgia State University but did not graduate. She later headed to New York City to pursue a career in acting. Once there, she signed with the Click Modeling Agency and enrolled in acting classes.

Roberts made her first big screen appearance in the film "Satisfaction" (1988), alongside Liam Neeson and Justine Bateman, as a band member looking for a summer gig. She had previously performed a small role opposite her brother, Eric, in "Blood Red" (she has two words of dialogue), filmed in 1987, although it was not released until 1989. Her first television appearance was as a juvenile rape victim in the initial season of the series "Crime Story" with Dennis Farina, in the episode titled "The Survivor", broadcast on February 13, 1987. Her first critical success with moviegoers was her performance in the independent film "Mystic Pizza" in 1988; that same year, she had a role in the fourth-season finale of "Miami Vice". In 1989, she was featured in "Steel Magnolias", as a young bride with diabetes, and received both her first Academy Award nomination (as Best Supporting Actress) and first Golden Globe Award win (Motion Picture Best Supporting Actress) for her performance.

Roberts became known to worldwide audiences when she starred with Richard Gere in the Cinderella/Pygmalionesque story, "Pretty Woman", in 1990. Roberts won the role after Michelle Pfeiffer, Molly Ringwald, Meg Ryan, Jennifer Jason Leigh, Karen Allen, and Daryl Hannah (her co-star in "Steel Magnolias") turned it down. The role also earned her a second Oscar nomination, this time as Best Actress, and second Golden Globe Award win, as Motion Picture Best Actress (Musical or Comedy). Her next box office success was the thriller "Sleeping with the Enemy", playing a battered wife who escapes her abusive husband, played by Patrick Bergin, and begins a new life in Iowa. She played Tinkerbell in Steven Spielberg's "Hook" in 1991, and also played a nurse in the 1991 film, "Dying Young". This work was followed by a two-year hiatus, during which she made no films other than a cameo appearance in Robert Altman's "The Player" (1992). In early 1993, she was the subject of a "People" magazine cover story asking, "What Happened to Julia Roberts?" She was offered the role of Annie Reed in "Sleepless in Seattle" (1993), but turned it down.

Roberts co-starred with Denzel Washington in "The Pelican Brief" (1993), based on John Grisham's 1992 novel of the same name. In 1996, she appeared in season 2 of "Friends" (episode 13 "The One After the Superbowl"). She had a relationship with cast member Matthew Perry at the time. According to an audience member, Roberts said to Perry about their on-screen kiss, "I'm glad we rehearsed this over the weekend." She was offered the role of Lucy Eleanor Moderatz in "While You Were Sleeping" (1995), but turned it down.

Roberts co-starred with Liam Neeson in "Michael Collins" (1996). Over the next few years, she starred in Stephen Frears' "Mary Reilly" (1996), followed by "My Best Friend's Wedding" in 1997. In 1998, she appeared on "Sesame Street" opposite the character Elmo, demonstrating her ability to change emotions. She was offered the role of Viola de Lesseps in "Shakespeare in Love" (1998) but turned it down. She starred in the films "Stepmom" (1998), alongside Susan Sarandon, "Notting Hill" (1999), with Hugh Grant, and, also in 1999, in "Runaway Bride", her second film with Richard Gere. Roberts was a guest star on the "Law & Order" television series episode "Empire" with series regular Benjamin Bratt (at that time her boyfriend). She earned a nomination for Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Guest Actress in a Drama Series.
In 2000, she played the lead role of real-life environmental activist Erin Brockovich in the film "Erin Brockovich".

In December 2000, Roberts, who had been the highest-paid actress through the 1990s, became the first actress to make "The Hollywood Reporter"'s list of the 50 most influential women in show business since the list had begun in 1992.

In 2001, Roberts received the Academy Award for Best Actress for her role in "Erin Brockovich". Roberts' acceptance speech for the award went over the allowed time limit but did not mention the real-life Brockovich, for which Roberts later apologized, saying she forgot. While presenting the Best Actor Award to Denzel Washington the following year, Roberts made a gaffe, saying she was glad that Tom Conti wasn't there; she meant the conductor, Bill Conti, who had tried to hasten the conclusion of her Oscar speech the previous year, but instead named the Scottish actor.

Roberts' first film following "Erin Brockovich" was the road gangster comedy, "The Mexican", giving her a chance to work with long-time friend Brad Pitt. The film's script was originally intended to be filmed as an independent production without major motion picture stars, but Roberts and Pitt, who had for some time been looking for a project they could do together, learned about it and decided to sign on. Though advertised as a typical romantic comedy star vehicle, the film does not focus solely on the Pitt/Roberts relationship and the two shared relatively little screen time together. "The Mexican" earned $66.8 million at the U.S. box office. Later in 2001, she starred in the romantic comedy "America's Sweethearts" along with Billy Crystal, John Cusack, and Catherine Zeta-Jones. Directed by Joe Roth, the Hollywood farce centers on a supercouple, Gwen and Eddie, who separate when she dumps him for another man. Roberts portrayed Gwen's once-overweight sister and assistant who has been secretly in love with Eddie (Cusack) for years. Reviews of the film were generally unfavorable: critics' felt that despite its famous cast, the movie lacked "sympathetic characters" and was "only funny in spurts." A commercial success, it grossed over US$138 million worldwide, however.

In fall 2001, Roberts teamed with "Erin Brockovich" director Steven Soderbergh for "Ocean's Eleven", a comedy-crime caper film and remake of the 1960 Rat Pack film of the same name, featuring an ensemble cast including George Clooney, Brad Pitt, and Matt Damon. Roberts played Tess Ocean, the ex-wife of leader Danny Ocean (Clooney), originally played by Angie Dickinson, who is dating a casino owner played by Andy García. In preparation for her role, Roberts studied Dickinson's performance by watching the original film at least seven times in order to get her part right. A success with critics and at the box office alike, "Ocean's Eleven" became the fifth highest-grossing film of the year with a total of US$450 million worldwide.

In 2003, Roberts was cast in Mike Newell's drama film "Mona Lisa Smile", also starring Kirsten Dunst, Maggie Gyllenhaal, and Julia Stiles. Roberts received a record US$25 million for her portrayal of a forward-thinking art history professor at Wellesley College in 1953 – the highest ever earned by an actress until then. The film garnered largely lukewarm reviews by critics, who found it "predictable and safe".

In 2004, Roberts replaced Cate Blanchett in Mike Nichols's "Closer", a romantic drama film written by Patrick Marber, based on his award-winning 1997 play of the same name. The film also starred Jude Law, Natalie Portman, and Clive Owen. Also in 2004, she reprised the role of Tess Ocean in the sequel "Ocean's Twelve". The film was deliberately much more unconventional than the first, epitomized by a sequence in which Roberts' character impersonates the real-life Julia Roberts, due to their strong resemblance. Though less well reviewed than "Eleven", the film became another major success at the box office, with a gross of US$363 million worldwide, mostly from its international run. Unlike all the male cast members, Roberts did not appear in the series' third and final installment, "Ocean's Thirteen" (2007), due to script issues. In 2005, she was featured in the music video for the single "Dreamgirl" by the Dave Matthews Band; it was her first music video appearance.

Roberts appeared in "The Hollywood Reporter"'s list of the 10 highest-paid actresses every year from 2002 (when the magazine began compiling its list) to 2005.

Roberts had two films released in 2006: "The Ant Bully" and "Charlotte's Web". Both films were animated features for which she provided voice acting. Her next film was "Charlie Wilson's War" (2007), with Tom Hanks and Philip Seymour Hoffman, directed by Mike Nichols; it was released on December 21, 2007. "Fireflies in the Garden" (2008), also starring Ryan Reynolds and Willem Dafoe, was released at the Berlin International Film Festival in February 2008 and was subsequently shown in European cinemas; it did not get a North American release until 2011. 

Roberts made her Broadway debut on April 19, 2006, as Nan in a revival of Richard Greenberg's 1997 play "Three Days of Rain" opposite Bradley Cooper and Paul Rudd. Although the play grossed nearly US$1 million in ticket sales during its first week and was a commercial success throughout its limited run, her performance drew criticism. Ben Brantley of "The New York Times" described Roberts as being fraught with "self-consciousness (especially in the first act) [and] only glancingly acquainted with the two characters she plays." Brantley also criticized the overall production, writing that "it's almost impossible to discern its artistic virtues from this wooden and splintered interpretation, directed by Joe Mantello." Writing in the "New York Post", Clive Barnes declared, "Hated the play. To be sadly honest, even hated her. At least I liked the rain—even if three days of it can seem an eternity."

In 2009, Lancôme announced that Roberts would become their global ambassador for their company.

Roberts starred with Clive Owen in the comedy-thriller "Duplicity" for which she received her seventh Golden Globe nomination. In 2010, she appeared in the ensemble romantic comedy "Valentine's Day", with Cooper, and starred in the film adaptation of "Eat Pray Love". "Eat Pray Love" had the highest debut at the box office for Roberts in a top-billed role since "America's Sweethearts". Later in the year, she signed a five-year extension with Lancôme for million. In 2011, she co-starred as Mercedes Tainot in the romantic comedy "Larry Crowne" opposite Tom Hanks, who directed and played the title role. The movie received generally bad reviews with only 35% of the 175 Rotten Tomatoes reviews giving it high ratings, although Roberts's comedic performance was praised. Roberts appeared in the 2012 Tarsem Singh adaptation of "Snow White", titled "Mirror Mirror", playing Queen Clementianna, Snow White's evil stepmother.

In 2013, Roberts appeared in "", playing one of Meryl Streep's character's three daughters. Her performance earned her nominations for the Golden Globe Award, Screen Actors Guild Award, Critics' Choice Award, and Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress, amongst other accolades. It was her fourth Academy Award nomination.

In 2014, Roberts narrated "Women in Hollywood", an episode of season 2 of "". Roberts appears in Givenchy's spring/summer 2015 campaign. In 2016, she starred in the film "Mother's Day".

In June 2017, Roberts announced she will be starring in a limited series for HBO, based on the Maria Semple novel, "Today Will Be Different". This will be Roberts' first television series.

Roberts runs the production company Red Om Films with her sister, Lisa Roberts Gillan, and Marisa Yeres Gill. Through Red Om, Roberts served as an executive producer of the first four films of the "American Girl" film series (based on the "American Girl" line of dolls), released between 2004 and 2008.

Roberts reportedly had romantic relationships with actors Jason Patric, Liam Neeson, Kiefer Sutherland, Dylan McDermott, and Matthew Perry. She was briefly engaged to Sutherland; they broke up three days before their scheduled wedding on June 11, 1991. On June 25, 1993, she married country singer Lyle Lovett; the wedding took place at St. James Lutheran Church in Marion, Indiana. They separated in March 1995 and subsequently divorced. From 1998 to 2001, Roberts dated actor Benjamin Bratt.

Roberts and her husband, cameraman Daniel Moder, met on the set of her film "The Mexican" in 2000 while she was still dating Bratt. At the time, Moder was married to Vera Steimberg. He filed for divorce a little over a year later, and after it was finalized, he and Roberts wed on July 4, 2002, at her ranch in Taos, New Mexico. Together, they have three children: twins Hazel Patricia and Phinnaeus "Finn" Walter Moder (born November 28, 2004) and son, Henry Daniel Moder (born June 18, 2007).

Roberts disclosed in a 2010 interview for "Elle" magazine that she believes in and practices Hinduism. Roberts is a devotee of the guru Neem Karoli Baba (Maharaj-ji), a picture of whom drew Roberts to Hinduism.

In September 2009, Swami Daram Dev of Ashram Hari Mandir in Pataudi, where Roberts was shooting "Eat Pray Love", gave her children new names after Hindu gods: Laxmi for Hazel, Ganesh for Phinnaeus and Krishna Balram for Henry.

Roberts has given her time and resources to UNICEF as well as to other charitable organizations. On May 10, 1995, Roberts arrived in Port-au-Prince, as she said, "to educate myself". The poverty she found was overwhelming. "My heart is just bursting", she said. UNICEF officials hoped that her six-day visit would trigger an outburst of giving: US$10 million in aid was sought at the time.

In 2000, Roberts narrated "Silent Angels", a documentary about Rett syndrome, a neurodevelopmental disorder, which was shot in Los Angeles, Baltimore and New York. The documentary was designed to help raise public awareness about the disease. In July 2006, Earth Biofuels announced Roberts as a spokeswoman for the company and as chair of the company's newly formed Advisory Board promoting the use of renewable fuels. She also supports Gucci's "Chime For Change" campaign that aims to spread female empowerment.

Roberts was the voice of Mother Nature in a 2014 short film for Conservation International, intended to raise awareness about climate change.




</doc>
<doc id="88833" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=88833" title="Olivia de Havilland">
Olivia de Havilland

Dame Olivia Mary de Havilland, (; born July 1, 1916) is a retired British-American actress, whose career spanned from 1935 to 1988. She appeared in 49 feature films, and was one of the leading movie stars during the golden age of Classical Hollywood. She is best known for her early screen performances in "The Adventures of Robin Hood" (1938) and "Gone with the Wind" (1939), and her later award-winning performances in "To Each His Own" (1946), "The Snake Pit" (1948), and "The Heiress" (1949).

Born in Tokyo to British parents, deHavilland and her younger sister, Joan Fontaine, moved with their mother to California in 1919. They were brought up by their mother Lilian, a former stage actress who taught them drama, music, and elocution. De Havilland made her acting debut in amateur theatre in "Alice in Wonderland". Later, she appeared in a local production of Shakespeare's "A Midsummer Night's Dream", which led to her playing Hermia in Max Reinhardt's stage production of the play and a movie contract with Warner Bros. Olivia deHavilland made her screen debut in Reinhardt's "A Midsummer Night's Dream" in 1935. During her career, she often played demure ingénues opposite popular leading men, including Errol Flynn, with whom she made nine films. They became one of Hollywood's most popular romantic on-screen pairings. She achieved her initial popularity in romantic comedy films, such as "The Great Garrick" (1937), and in Westerns, such as "Dodge City" (1939). Her natural beauty and refined acting style made her particularly effective in historical period dramas, such as "Anthony Adverse" (1936), and romantic dramas, such as "Hold Back the Dawn" (1941). In her later career, she was most successful in dramas, such as "Light in the Piazza" (1962), and unglamorous roles in psychological dramas including "Hush… Hush, Sweet Charlotte" (1964).

In addition to her film career, deHavilland continued her work in the theatre, appearing three times on Broadway, in "Romeo and Juliet" (1951), "Candida" (1952), and "A Gift of Time" (1962). She also worked in television, appearing in the successful miniseries, "" (1979), and television feature films, such as "", for which she received a Primetime Emmy Award nomination. During her film career, deHavilland won two Academy Awards, two Golden Globe Awards, two New York Film Critics Circle Awards, the National Board of Review Award for Best Actress, and the Venice Film Festival Volpi Cup. For her contributions to the motion picture industry, she received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame. For her lifetime contribution to the arts, she received the National Medal of Arts from President George W. Bush, and was appointed a "Chevalier" of the Légion d'honneur by French President Nicolas Sarkozy.

After romantic relationships with Howard Hughes, James Stewart, and John Huston, she married author Marcus Goodrich, with whom she had a son, Benjamin. Following her divorce from Goodrich in 1953, she moved to Paris and married Pierre Galante, an executive editor for the French journal "Paris Match", with whom she had a daughter, Gisèle. In 1962, she published "Every Frenchman Has One", an account of her life in France.

DeHavilland and Joan Fontaine are the only siblings to have won Academy Awards in a lead acting category. A lifelong rivalry between the two actresses resulted in an estrangement that lasted over three decades. DeHavilland has lived in Paris since 1956, and celebrated her 100th birthday on July 1, 2016. In June 2017, two weeks before her 101st birthday, de Havilland was appointed Dame Commander of the Order of the British Empire in the 2017 Birthday Honours for services to drama. She is the oldest woman ever to receive the honour. In a statement, she called it "the most gratifying of birthday presents".

DeHavilland's father, Walter de Havilland (1872–1968), served as an English professor at the Imperial University in Tokyo before becoming a patent attorney. Her mother, Lilian Fontaine (née Ruse; 1886–1975), was educated at the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art in London and became a stage actress. Lilian also sang with the Master of the King's Music, Sir Walter Parratt, and toured England with the composer Ralph Vaughan Williams. Olivia's paternal cousin was Sir Geoffrey deHavilland (1882–1965), an aircraft designer and founder of the de Havilland aircraft company.

Lilian and Walter met in Japan in 1913 and were married the following year; the marriage was not a happy one due in part to Walter's infidelities. DeHavilland was born on July 1, 1916. They moved into a large house in Tokyo, where Lilian gave informal singing recitals for the European colony. Olivia's younger sister Joan (born Joan de Beauvoir de Havilland)later known as actress Joan Fontainewas born fifteen months later, on October 22, 1917.

In February 1919, Lilian persuaded her husband to take the family back to England to a climate better suited for their ailing daughters. They sailed aboard the SS "Siberia Maru" to San Francisco, where the family stopped to treat Olivia's tonsillitis. After Joan developed pneumonia, Lilian decided to remain with her daughters in California, where they eventually settled in the village of Saratoga, south of San Francisco. Her father abandoned the family and returned to his Japanese housekeeper, who eventually became his second wife.

Olivia was raised to appreciate the arts, beginning with ballet lessons at the age of four, and piano lessons a year later. She learned to read before she was six, and her mother, who occasionally taught drama, music, and elocution, had her reciting passages from Shakespeare to strengthen her diction. During this period, her younger sister Joan first started calling her "Livvie", a nickname that would last throughout her life. DeHavilland entered Saratoga Grammar School in 1922 and did well in her studies. She enjoyed reading, writing poetry, and drawing, and once represented her grammar school in a county spelling bee, coming in second place. In 1923, Lilian had a new Tudor-style house built, where the family resided until the early 1930s. In April 1925, after her divorce was finalized, Lilian married George Milan Fontaine, a department store manager for O.A.Hale & Co. in San Jose. Fontaine was a good provider and respectable businessman, but his strict parenting style generated animosity and later rebellion in both of his new stepdaughters.

DeHavilland continued her education at Los Gatos High School, near her home in Saratoga. There, she excelled in oratory and field hockey and participated in school plays and the school drama club, eventually becoming the club's secretary. With plans of becoming a schoolteacher of English and speech, she also attended Notre Dame Convent in Belmont.

In 1933, deHavilland made her debut in amateur theatre in "Alice in Wonderland", a production of the Saratoga Community Players based on the novel by Lewis Carroll. She also appeared in several school plays, including "The Merchant of Venice" and "Hansel and Gretel". Her passion for drama eventually led to a confrontation with her stepfather, who forbade her from participating in further extracurricular activities. When he learned that she had won the lead role of Elizabeth Bennet in a school fund-raising production of Jane Austen's "Pride and Prejudice", he gave her an ultimatum to either stay home or not return home. Not wanting to let her school and classmates down, she left home forever, moving in with a family friend.

After graduating from high school in 1934, deHavilland was offered a scholarship to Mills College in Oakland to pursue her chosen career as an English teacher. She was also offered the role of Puck in the Saratoga Community Theater production of Shakespeare's "A Midsummer Night's Dream". That summer, Austrian director Max Reinhardt came to California for a major new production of the same play to premiere at the Hollywood Bowl. After one of Reinhardt's assistants saw her perform in Saratoga, he offered her the second understudy position for the role of Hermia. One week before the premiere, the understudy Jean Rouverol and lead actress Gloria Stuart both left the project, leaving 18-year-old deHavilland to play Hermia. Impressed with her performance, Reinhardt offered her the part in the four-week autumn tour that followed. During that tour, Reinhardt received word that he would direct the Warner Bros. film version of his stage production, and he offered her the film role of Hermia. With her mind still set on becoming a teacher, deHavilland initially wavered, but eventually Reinhardt and executive producer Henry Blanke persuaded her to sign a five-year contract with Warner Bros. on November 12, 1934, with a starting salary of $200 a week.

DeHavilland made her screen debut in Reinhardt's "A Midsummer Night's Dream", which was filmed at Warner Bros. studios from December 19, 1934 to March 9, 1935. During the production, deHavilland picked up film acting techniques from the film's co-director William Dieterle, and camera techniques from cinematographer Hal Mohr, who was impressed with her questions about his work. By the end of filming, she had learned the effect of lighting and camera angles on how she appeared on screen and how to find her best lighting. Following premieres in New York and Beverly Hills, the film was released on October 30, 1935. Despite the publicity campaign, the film generated little enthusiasm with audiences. While the critical response was mixed, deHavilland's performance was praised by "The San Francisco Examiner" critic. In his review in the "Brooklyn Daily Eagle", Winston Burdett noted that she "acts graciously and does greater justice to Shakespeare's language than anyone else in the cast". Two minor comedies followed, "Alibi Ike" with Joe E. Brown and "The Irish in Us" with James Cagney. In both films, she played the sweet and charming love interesta role into which she would later become typecast. After the experience of being a Reinhardt player, deHavilland felt disappointed being assigned these routine heroine roles. In March, deHavilland and her mother moved into an apartment at the Chateau des Fleurs at 6626 Franklin Avenue in Hollywood.
Although Warner Brothers studio had assumed that the many costumed films that studios like MGM had earlier produced would never succeed during the years of the Great Depression, they nonetheless took a chance by producing "Captain Blood" in 1935. The film is a swashbuckler action drama based on the popular novel by Rafael Sabatini and directed by Michael Curtiz. It would star a then unknown extra, Errol Flynn, alongside the little-known de Havilland. According to film historian Tony Thomas, both actors had "classic good looks, cultured speaking voices, and a sense of distant aristocracy about them". Filmed between August 5 and October 29, 1935, "Captain Blood" gave deHavilland the opportunity to appear in her first costumed historical romance and adventure epic, a genre to which she was well suited, given her beauty and elegance. In the film, she played Arabella Bishop, the niece of a Jamaica plantation owner, who purchases at auction an Irish physician wrongly condemned to servitude. The on-screen chemistry between deHavilland and Flynn was evident from their first scenes together, where clashes between her character's spirited hauteur and his character's playful braggadocio did not mask their mutual attraction to each other. Arabella is a feisty young woman who knows what she wants and is willing to fight for it. The bantering tone of their exchanges in the filmthe healthy give-and-take and mutual respectbecame the basis for their on-screen relationship in subsequent films. "Captain Blood" was released on December 28, 1935, and received good reviews and wide public appeal. DeHavilland's performance was singled out in "The New York Times" and "Variety". The film was nominated for four Academy Awards, including Best Picture. The popular success of the film, as well as the critical response to the on-screen couple, led to seven additional collaborations.

In 1936, deHavilland appeared in Mervyn LeRoy's historical period drama "Anthony Adverse" with Fredric March. Based on the popular novel by Hervey Allen, the film follows the adventures of an orphan raised by a Scottish merchant, whose pursuit of fortune separates him from the innocent peasant girl he loves, marries, and eventually loses. DeHavilland played a peasant girl, Angela, who after being separated from her slave-trader husband, becomes opera star Mademoiselle Georges, the mistress of Napoleon. The film earned six Academy Award nominations, including Best Picture. It garnered deHavilland good exposure and the opportunity to portray a character as she develops over time. Howard Barnes of the "New York Herald Tribune" found her later scenes as Mademoiselle Georges "not very credible", but Frank S. Nugent of "The New York Times" called her "a winsome Angela". That same year, she was reunited with Flynn in Michael Curtiz's period action film "The Charge of the Light Brigade", set during the Crimean War which became a box office success.

During the film's production, deHavilland renegotiated her contract with Warner Bros. and signed a seven-year contract on April 14, 1936, with a starting weekly salary of five hundred dollars (). Toward the end of the year, 20-year-old deHavilland and her mother moved to 2337 Nella Vista Avenue in the Los Feliz section of Los Angeles.

In 1937, deHavilland had her first top billing in Archie Mayo's comedy "Call It a Day", about a middle-class English family struggling with the romantic effects of spring fever during the course of a single day. DeHavilland played daughter Catherine Hilton, who falls in love with the handsome artist hired to paint her portrait. The film did not do well at the box office and did little to advance her career. She fared better in Mayo's screwball comedy "It's Love I'm After" with Leslie Howard and Bette Davis. DeHavilland played Marcia West, a young debutante and theater fan enamored with a Barrymore-like matinee idol who decides to help the girl's fiancé by pretending to be an abominable cad. The film received good reviews, with "Variety" calling it "fresh, clever, excellently directed and produced, and acted by an ensemble that clicks from start to finish", and praising deHavilland.

That same year, deHavilland made two more period films, beginning with "The Great Garrick", a fictional romantic comedy about the 18th-century English actor's encounter with jealous players from the Comédie-Française who plot to embarrass him on his way to Paris. Wise to their prank, Garrick plays along with the ruse, determined to get the last laugh, even on a lovely young aristocrat, deHavilland's Germaine Dupont, whom he mistakenly believes to be one of the players. With her refined demeanor and diction, deHavilland delivers a performance that is "lighthearted and thoroughly believable", according to Judith Kass. "Variety" praised the film, calling it "a production of superlative workmanship". Despite the positive reviews, the film did not do as well at the box office. Her final film that year was Michael Curtiz's romantic drama "Gold Is Where You Find It", a film about the late 19th-century conflict in the Sacramento Valley between gold miners and their hydraulic equipment and farmers whose land is being flooded. DeHavilland played the daughter of a farmer, Serena Ferris, who falls in love with the mining engineer responsible for the flooding. The film was released in February 1938, and was her first appearance in three-strip Technicolor.

In September 1937, deHavilland was selected by Warner Bros. studio head Jack L. Warner to play Maid Marian opposite Errol Flynn in "The Adventures of Robin Hood" (1938). The Technicolor production was filmed on location between September 26, 1937, and January 14, 1938, at Bidwell Park, Busch Gardens, and Lake Sherwood in California. Directed by William Keighley and Michael Curtiz, the film is about the legendary Robin Hood, a Saxon knight who opposes the corrupt and brutal Prince John and his Norman lords while good King Richard is away fighting in the Third Crusade. The king's ward, Maid Marian, initially opposes Robin, but later supports him after learning his true intentions of helping his oppressed people. No mere bystander to events, Marian risks her life to save Robin by providing his men a plan for his escape. As defined by deHavilland, Marian is both a beautiful fairy-tale heroine and a spirited, intelligent woman "whose actions are governed by her mind as well as her heart", according to author Judith Kass. "The Adventures of Robin Hood" was released on May 14, 1938, and was an immediate critical and commercial success, earning an Academy Award nomination for Best Picture. It went on to become one of the most popular adventure films of the Classical Hollywood era.

The popularity of "The Adventures of Robin Hood" brought deHavilland a new level of fame as a movie star, but this new status was not reflected in her subsequent film assignments at Warner Bros. Her next several roles were more routine and less challenging. In the romantic comedy "Four's a Crowd" (1938), she played Lorri Dillingwell, a dizzy rich girl being romanced by a conniving public relations man looking to land an account with her eccentric grandfather. In Ray Enright's romantic comedy "Hard to Get" (1938), she played another dizzy rich girl, Margaret Richards, whose desire to exact revenge on a gas station attendant leads to her own comeuppance. While deHavilland was certainly capable of playing these kinds of characters, her personality was better suited to stronger and more dramatic roles, according to Judith Kass. By this time, deHavilland had serious doubts about her career at Warner Bros.

Some film scholars consider 1939 to be the high point of the golden age of Classical Hollywood, producing classics in many genres, including the Western. Warner Bros. produced Michael Curtiz's sprawling Technicolor adventure "Dodge City", Flynn and deHavilland's first Western film. Set during the American Civil War, the film is about a Texas trailblazer who witnesses the brutal lawlessness of Dodge City, Kansas, and becomes sheriff to clean up the town. DeHavilland played Abbie Irving, whose initial hostility towards Flynn's character Wade Hatton is transformed by events, and the two fall in loveby now a proven formula for their on-screen relationships. Curtiz's action sequences, Sol Polito's cinematography, Max Steiner's expansive film score, and perhaps the "definitive saloon brawl in movie history" all contributed to the film's success. "Variety" described the film as "a lusty western, packed with action". For deHavilland, playing yet one more supporting love interest in a limited role, "Dodge City" represented the emotional low point of her career to that point. She later said, "I was in such a depressed state that I could hardly remember my lines."

In a letter to a colleague dated November 18, 1938, film producer David O. Selznick wrote, "I would give anything if we had Olivia deHavilland under contract to us so that we could cast her as Melanie." The film he was preparing to shoot was "Gone with the Wind", and Jack L. Warner was unwilling to lend her out for the project. DeHavilland had read the novel, and unlike most other actresses, who wanted the Scarlett O'Hara role, she wanted to play Melanie Hamiltona character whose quiet dignity and inner strength she understood and felt she could bring to life on the screen.

DeHavilland turned to Warner's wife Anne for help. Warner later recalled, "Olivia, who had a brain like a computer concealed behind those fawn-like eyes, simply went to my wife and they joined forces to change my mind." Warner relented, and deHavilland was signed to the project a few weeks before the start of principal photography on January 26, 1939. Set in the American South during the 19th century, the film is about the strong-willed daughter of a Georgia plantation owner in love with the husband of her sister-in-law, Melanie, whose kindness stands in sharp contrast to those around her. According to film historian Tony Thomas, deHavilland's skillful and subtle performance effectively presents this character of selfless love and quiet strength in a way that keeps her vital and interesting throughout the film. "Gone with the Wind" had its world premiere in Atlanta, Georgia, on December 15, 1939, and was well received. Frank S. Nugent of "The Times" wrote that deHavilland's Melanie "is a gracious, dignified, tender gem of characterization", and John C. Flinn, Sr., in "Variety" called her "a standout". The film won 10 Academy Awards, including Best Picture, and deHavilland received her first nomination for Best Supporting Actress.

Within days of completing her work in "Gone with the Wind" in June 1939, deHavilland returned to Warner Bros. and began filming Michael Curtiz's historical drama "The Private Lives of Elizabeth and Essex" with Bette Davis and Errol Flynn. She had hoped her work on Selznick's prestige picture would lead to first-rate roles at Warner Bros., but instead she received third billing below the title as the queen's lady-in-waiting. In early September, she was lent out to Samuel Goldwyn Productions for Sam Wood's romantic caper film "Raffles" with David Niven, about a high-society cricketer and jewel thief. She later complained, "I had nothing to do with that style of film."

In early 1940, deHavilland refused to appear in several films assigned to her, initiating the first of her suspensions at the studio. She did agree to play in Curtis Bernhardt's musical comedy drama "My Love Came Back" with Jeffrey Lynn and Eddie Albert, who played a classical music student turned swing jazz bandleader. DeHavilland played violinist Amelia Cornell, whose life becomes complicated by the support of a wealthy sponsor. In his review in "The New York Times", Bosley Crowther described the film as "a featherlight frolic, a rollicking roundelay of deliciously pointed nonsense", finding that deHavilland "plays the part with pace and wit". That same year, deHavilland was reunited with Flynn in their sixth film together, Michael Curtiz's Western adventure "Santa Fe Trail", set against the backdrop of abolitionist John Brown's fanatical antislavery attacks in the days leading up to the American Civil War. The mostly fictional story follows West Point cadets J. E. B. Stuart, played by Flynn, and George Armstrong Custer, played by Ronald Reagan, as they make their way west, both vying for the affection of deHavilland's Kit Carson Halliday. Playing Kit in a provocative, tongue-in-cheek manner, deHavilland creates a character of real substance and dimension, according to Tony Thomas. Following a world premiere on December 13, 1940, at the Lensic Theatre in Santa Fe, New Mexicoattended by cast members, reporters, the governor, and over 60,000 fans"Santa Fe Trail" went on to become one of the top-grossing films of 1940. DeHavilland, who accompanied Flynn on the well-publicized train ride to Santa Fe, did not attend the premiere, having been diagnosed with appendicitis that morning and rushed into surgery.

Following her emergency surgery, deHavilland began a long period of convalescence in a Los Angeles hospital during which time she rejected several scripts offered to her by Warner Bros., leading to another suspension. In 1941, she appeared in three commercially successful films, beginning with Raoul Walsh's romantic comedy "The Strawberry Blonde" with James Cagney. Set during the Gay Nineties, the story involves a man who marries an outspoken advocate for women's rights after a rival steals his glamorous "strawberry blonde" girlfriend, and later discovers he ended up with a loving and understanding wife. The film was a critical and commercial success. In Mitch Leisen's romantic drama "Hold Back the Dawn" with Charles Boyer for Paramount Pictures, she transitioned to a different type of role for heran ordinary, decent small-town teacher whose life and sexuality are awakened by a sophisticated European gigolo, whose own life is positively affected by her love. Leisen's careful direction and guidance appealed to deHavillandmuch more than the workman-like approach of her Warner Bros. directors. Bosley Crowther of "The New York Times" wrote that the actress "plays the school teacher as a woman with romantic fancies whose honesty and pride are her ownand the film'schief support. Incidentally, she is excellent." For this performance she garnered her second Academy Award nominationthis time for Best Actress.

In July 1941, deHavilland was reunited with Flynn for their eighth movie together, Raoul Walsh's epic "They Died with Their Boots On". The film is loosely based on the courtship and marriage of George Armstrong Custer and Elizabeth "Libbie" Bacon. Flynn and deHavilland had a falling out the previous yearmainly over the roles she was being givenand she did not intend to work with him again. Even Flynn acknowledged, "She was sick to death of playing 'the girl' and badly wanted a few good roles to show herself and the world that she was a fine actress." After she learned from Warner that Flynn had come to his office saying he needed her in the film, deHavilland accepted. Screenwriter Lenore Coffee was brought in to add several romantic scenes, and improve the overall dialogue. The result is a film that includes some of their finest work together. Their last appearance on screen is Custer's farewell to his wife. "Errol was quite sensitive," deHavilland would later remember, "I think he knew it would be the last time we worked together." Flynn's final line in that scene would hold special meaning for her: "Walking through life with you, ma'am, has been a very gracious thing." "They Died with Their Boots On" was released on November 21, 1941, and while some reviewers criticized the film's historical inaccuracies, most applauded the action sequences, cinematography, and acting. Thomas M. Pryor of "The New York Times" found deHavilland "altogether captivating". The film went on to earn $2,550,000 (), Warner Bros' second-biggest money-maker of that year.

In 1942, deHavilland appeared in Elliott Nugent's romantic comedy "The Male Animal" with Henry Fonda, about an idealistic professor fighting for academic freedom while trying to hold onto his job and his wife Ellen. While her role was not particularly challenging, deHavilland's delineation of an intelligent, good-natured woman trying to resolve the unsettling circumstances of her life played a major part in the film's success, according to Tony Thomas. The film was a critical and commercial success, with Bosley Crowther of "The Times" noting that deHavilland "concocts a delightfully pliant and saucy character as the wife". That year, she also appeared in John Huston's drama "In This Our Life" with Bette Davis. Based on the Pulitzer Prize-winning novel of the same name by Ellen Glasgow, the story is about two sisters whose lives are destroyed by the anger and jealousy of one of the sisters. Crowther gave the film a negative review, but noted deHavilland's "warm and easy performance". During production, deHavilland and Huston began a romantic relationship that lasted three years.

According to deHavilland, one of the few truly satisfying roles she played for Warner Bros. was the title character in Norman Krasna's romantic comedy "Princess O'Rourke" (1943), with Robert Cummings. Filmed in July and August 1942, the story is about a European princess in Washington, DC, visiting her diplomat uncle, who is trying to find her an American husband. Intent on marrying a man of her own choosing, she boards a plane heading west and ends up falling in love with an American pilot, who is unaware of her true identity. The film was released on October 23, 1943, and did well at the box office. Bosley Crowther called it "a film which is in the best tradition of American screen comedy", and found deHavilland's performance "charming".

After fulfilling her seven-year Warner Bros. contract in 1943, deHavilland was informed that six months had been added to her contract for the times that she had been suspended. At the time, the studios had adopted the position that California law allowed them to suspend contract players for rejecting a role, and the period of suspension could be added to the contract period. Most contract players accepted this, but a few tried to change the system, including Bette Davis, who mounted an unsuccessful lawsuit against Warner Bros. in the 1930s. On August 23, 1943, acting on the advice of her lawyer, Martin Gang, deHavilland took Warner Bros. to court, citing an existing section of the California Labor Code that forbade an employer from enforcing a contract against an employee for longer than seven years from the date of first performance. In November 1943, the California Superior Court found in deHavilland's favor, and Warner Bros. immediately appealed. On December 8, 1944, the California Court of Appeal for the Second District ruled in her favor. The decision was one of the most significant and far-reaching legal rulings in Hollywood, reducing the power of the studios and extending greater creative freedom to performers. California's resulting "seven-year rule", also known as Labor Code Section 2855, is still known today as the De Havilland Law. Her legal victory, which cost her $13,000 () in legal fees, won deHavilland the respect and admiration of her peers, among them her own sister, Joan Fontaine, who later commented, "Hollywood owes Olivia a great deal." Warner Bros. reacted to deHavilland's lawsuit by circulating a letter to other studios that had the effect of a "virtual blacklisting". As a consequence, deHavilland did not work at a film studio for nearly two years.
DeHavilland became a naturalized citizen of the United States on November 28, 1941, ten days before the United States entered World War II militarily, alongside the Allied Forces. During the war years, she actively sought out ways to express her patriotism and contribute to the war effort. In May 1942, she joined the Hollywood Victory Caravan, a three-week train tour of the country that raised money through the sale of war bonds. Later that year she began attending events at the Hollywood Canteen, meeting and dancing with the troops. In December 1943 deHavilland joined a USO tour that traveled throughout the United States, Alaska, and the South Pacific, visiting wounded soldiers in military hospitals. She earned the respect and admiration of the troops for visiting the isolated islands and battlefronts in the Pacific. She survived flights in damaged aircraft and a bout with viral pneumonia requiring several days' stay in one of the island barrack hospitals. She later remembered, "I loved doing the tours because it was a way I could serve my country and contribute to the war effort."

After the California Court of Appeals ruling freed her from her Warner Bros. contract, deHavilland signed a two-picture deal with Paramount Pictures. In June 1945, she began filming Mitchell Leisen's drama "To Each His Own", about an unwed mother who gives up her child for adoption and then spends the rest of her life trying to undo that decision. DeHavilland insisted on bringing in Leisen as director, trusting his eye for detail, his empathy for actors, and the way he controlled sentiment in their previous collaboration, "Hold Back the Dawn". The role required deHavilland to age nearly 30 years over the course of the filmfrom an innocent, small-town girl to a shrewd, ruthless businesswoman devoted to her cosmetics company. While deHavilland never formally studied acting, she did read Stanislavsky's autobiography "My Life in Art" and applied one of his "methods" for this role. To help her define her character during the four periods of the story, she used a different perfume for each period. She also lowered the pitch of her voice incrementally in each period until it became a mature woman's voice. Her performance earned her the Academy Award for Best Actress in 1946her first Oscar. According to film historian Tony Thomas, the award represented a vindication of her long struggle with Warner Bros. and confirmation of her abilities as an actress.
Her next two roles were challenging. In Robert Siodmak's psychological thriller "The Dark Mirror" (1946), deHavilland played twin sisters Ruth and Terry Collinsone loving and normal, the other psychotic. In addition to the technical problems of showing her as two characters interacting with each other on screen at the same time, deHavilland needed to portray two separate and psychologically opposite people. While the film was not well received by critics"Variety" said the film "gets lost in a maze of psychological gadgets and speculation"deHavilland's performance was praised by Tony Thomas, who called her final scene in the film "an almost frighteningly convincing piece of acting". In his review in "The Nation", James Agee wrote that "her playing is thoughtful, quiet, detailed, and well sustained, and since it is founded, as some more talented playing is not, in an unusually healthful-seeming and likable temperament, it is an undivided pleasure to see." While appearing in a summer stock production of "What Every Woman Knows" in Westport, Connecticut, her second professional stage appearance, deHavilland began dating Marcus Goodrich, a Navy veteran, journalist, and author of the 1941 novel "Delilah". They were married on August 26, 1946.

De Havilland was praised for her performance as Virginia Cunningham in Anatole Litvak's drama "The Snake Pit" (1948), one of the first films to attempt a realistic portrayal of mental illness and an important exposé of the harsh conditions in state mental hospitals, according to film critic Philip French. Based on a novel by Mary Jane Ward and produced by Darryl F. Zanuck, the film is about a woman placed in a mental institution by her husband to help her recover from a nervous breakdown. Virginia Cunningham was one of the most difficult of all her film roles, requiring significant preparation both mentally and physicallyshe deliberately lost weight to help create her gaunt appearance on screen. She consulted regularly with psychiatrists hired as consultants for the film, and visited Camarillo State Mental Hospital to research her role and observe the patients. The extreme physical discomfort of the hydrotherapy and simulated electric shock therapy scenes were especially challenging for the slight actress. In her performance, she conveyed her mental anguish by physically transforming her face with furrowed brow, wild staring eyes, and grimacing mouth.

In 1949, deHavilland appeared in William Wyler's period drama "The Heiress" (1949), the fourth in a string of critically acclaimed performances. After seeing the play on Broadway, deHavilland called Wyler and urged him to fly to New York to see what she felt would be a perfect role for her. Wyler obliged, loved the play, and with deHavilland's help arranged for Paramount to secure the film rights. Adapted for the screen by Ruth and Augustus Goetz and based on the 1880 novel "Washington Square" by Henry James, the film is about a young naïve woman who falls in love with a young man, over the objections of her cruel and emotionally abusive father, who suspects the young man of being a fortune seeker. As she had done in "Hold Back the Dawn", deHavilland portrayed her character's transformation from a shy, trusting innocent to a guarded, mature woman over a period of years. Her delineation of Catherine Sloper is developed through carefully crafted movements, gestures, and facial expressions that convey a submissive and inhibited young woman. Her timid voice, nervous hands, downcast eyes, and careful movements all communicate what the character is too shy to verbalize. Throughout the production, Wyler pressed deHavilland hard to elicit the requisite visual points of the character. When Catherine returns home after being jilted, the director had the actress carry a suitcase filled with heavy books up the stairs to convey the weight of Catherine's trauma physically instead of using a planned speech in the original script. "The Heiress" was released in October 1949 and was well received by critics. For her performance, she received the New York Film Critics Award, the Golden Globe Award, and the Academy Award for Best Actressher second Oscar.

After giving birth to her first child, Benjamin, on September 27, 1949, deHavilland took time off from making films to be with her infant. She turned down the role of Blanche DuBois in "A Streetcar Named Desire", later explaining that becoming a mother was a "transforming experience" and that she could not relate to the character. In 1950, her family moved to New York City, where she began rehearsals for a major new stage production of Shakespeare's "Romeo and Juliet"; it was her lifelong ambition to play Juliet on the stage. The play opened at the Broadhurst Theatre on March 11, 1951, to mixed reviews, with some critics believing the 35-year-old actress was too old for the role. The play closed after 45 performances. Undaunted, deHavilland accepted the title role in the stage production of George Bernard Shaw's comedy "Candida", which opened at the National Theatre on Broadway in April 1952. While reviews of the play were mixed, deHavilland's performance was well received, and following the scheduled 32 performances, she went on tour with the company and delivered 323 additional performances, many to sold-out audiences. While deHavilland achieved major accomplishments during this period of her career, her marriage to Goodrich, 18 years her senior, had grown strained due to his unstable temperament. In August 1952, she filed for divorce, which became final the following year.

In April 1953, at the invitation of the French government, she traveled to the Cannes Film Festival, where she met Pierre Galante, an executive editor for the French journal "Paris Match". Following a long-distance courtship and the requisite nine-month residency requirement, deHavilland and Galante married on April 12, 1955, in the village of Yvoy-le-Marron, and settled together in a three-story house near the Bois de Boulogne park in Paris' 16th arrondissement". "That same year, she returned to the screen in Terence Young's period drama "That Lady" (1955), about a Spanish princess and her unrequited love for King Philip II of Spain, whose respect she earned in her youth after losing an eye in a sword fight defending his honor. According to Tony Thomas, the film uses authentic Spanish locations effectively, but suffers from a convoluted plot and excessive dialogue, and while deHavilland delivered a warm and elegant performance as Ana de Mendoza, the film was disappointing. Following her appearances in the romantic melodrama "Not as a Stranger" (1955) and "The Ambassador's Daughter" (1956)neither of which were successful at the box officedeHavilland gave birth to her second child, Gisèle Galante, on July 18, 1956.

De Havilland returned to the screen in 1958 in Michael Curtiz's Western drama "The Proud Rebel", a film about a former Confederate soldier, Alan Ladd, whose wife was killed in the war and whose son lost the ability to speak after witnessing the tragedy. DeHavilland played Linnett Moore, a tough yet feminine frontier woman who cares for the boy and comes to love his father. The movie was filmed on location in Utah, where deHavilland learned to hitch and drive a team of horses and handle a gun for her role. "The Proud Rebel" was released May 28, 1958, and was well received by audiences and critics. In his review for "The New York Times", A.H. Weiler called the film a "truly sensitive effort" and "heartwarming drama", and praised deHavilland's ability to convey the "warmth, affection and sturdiness needed in the role".

One of deHavilland's most noted performances during this period was in Guy Green's romantic drama "Light in the Piazza" (1962) with Rossano Brazzi. Filmed in Florence and Rome, and based on Elizabeth Spencer's novel of the same name, the film is about a middle-class American tourist on extended vacation in Italy with her beautiful 26-year-old daughter, who is mentally disabled as a result of a childhood accident. Faced with the prospect of her daughter falling in love with a young Italian, the mother struggles with conflicting emotions about her daughter's future. DeHavilland projects a calm maternal serenity throughout most of the film, only showing glimpses of the worried mother anxious for her child's happiness. The film was released on February 19, 1962, and was well received, with a "Hollywood Reporter" reviewer calling it "an uncommon love story ... told with rare delicacy and force", and "Variety" noting that the film "achieves the rare and delicate balance of artistic beauty, romantic substance, dramatic novelty and commercial appeal". "Variety" singled out deHavilland’s performance as "one of great consistency and subtle projection".

In early 1962, deHavilland traveled to New York and began rehearsals for Garson Kanin's stage play "A Gift of Time". Adapted from the autobiographical book "Death of a Man" by Lael Tucker Wertenbaker, the play explores the emotionally painful struggle of a housewife forced to deal with the slow death of her husband, played by Henry Fonda. The play opened at the Ethel Barrymore Theatre on Broadway to positive notices, with deHavilland receiving her best reviews as a stage actress. Theater critic Walter Kerr praised her final scene, writing, "As darkness gathers, the actress gains in stature, taking on the simple and resolute willingness to understand." The "New York World Telegram and Sun" reviewer concluded, "It is Miss deHavilland who gives the play its unbroken continuity. This distinguished actress reveals Lael as a special and admirable woman." She stayed with the production for 90 performances. The year 1962 also had the publication of deHavilland's first book, "Every Frenchman Has One", a lighthearted account of her often amusing attempts to understand and adapt to French life, manners, and customs. The book sold out its first printing prior to the publication date and went on to become a bestseller.

In 1964, de Havilland appeared in her last two leading roles in feature filmsboth psychological thrillers. In Walter Grauman's "Lady in a Cage", she played a wealthy poet who gets trapped in her mansion's elevator and faces the threat of three terrorizing hooligans in her own home. Critics responded negatively to the graphic violence and cruelty shown on screen. A.H. Weiler of "The New York Times" called it a "sordid, if suspenseful, exercise in aimless brutality". That same year, deHavilland appeared in Robert Aldrich's "Hush… Hush, Sweet Charlotte" with her close friend Bette Davis. After Joan Crawford left the picture due to illness, Davis had Aldrich fly to Switzerland to persuade a reluctant deHavilland to accept the role of Miriam Deering, a cruel, conniving character hidden behind the charming façade of a polite and cultured lady. Her quiet, restrained performance provided a counterbalance to Davis. Film historian Tony Thomas described her performance as "a subtle piece of acting" that was "a vital contribution to the effectiveness of the film". The film was well received and earned seven Academy Award nominations.

As film roles became more difficult to find, a common problem shared by many Hollywood veterans from her era, deHavilland began working in television dramas, despite her dislike of the networks' practice of breaking up story lines with commercials. Her first venture into the medium was a teleplay directed by Sam Peckinpah called "Noon Wine" (1966) on "ABC Stage 67", a dark tragedy about a farmer's act of murder that leads to his suicide. The production and her performance as the farmer's wife Ellie were well received. In 1972, she starred in her first television feature film, "The Screaming Woman", about a wealthy woman recovering from a nervous breakdown. In 1979, she appeared in the ABC miniseries "" in the role of Mrs. Warner, the wife of a former Confederate officer played by Henry Fonda. The miniseries was seen by an estimated 110 million peoplenearly one-third of American homes with television sets. Throughout the 1970s, deHavilland's film work was limited to smaller supporting roles and cameo appearances. Her last feature film was "The Fifth Musketeer" (1979). During this period, deHavilland began doing speaking engagements in cities across the United States with a talk entitled "From the City of the Stars to the City of Light", a program of personal reminiscences about her life and career. She also attended tributes to "Gone with the Wind".

In the 1980s, her television work included an Agatha Christie television film "Murder Is Easy" (1982), the television drama "The Royal Romance of Charles and Diana" (1982) in which she played the Queen Mother, and the 1986 ABC miniseries "". Her most notable performance of the decade was in the television film "" (1986) as Dowager Empress Maria, which earned her a Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actress in a Series, Miniseries or Television Film. In 1988, deHavilland appeared in the HTV romantic television drama "The Woman He Loved"; it was her final screen performance.

In retirement, deHavilland has remained active in the film community. In 1998, she traveled to New York to help promote a special showing of "Gone with the Wind". In 2003, she appeared as a presenter at the 75th Academy Awards. In 2004, Turner Classic Movies produced a retrospective piece called "Melanie Remembers" in which she was interviewed for the 65th anniversary of the original release of "Gone with the Wind". In June 2006, she made appearances at tributes commemorating her 90th birthday at the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences and the Los Angeles County Museum of Art.

On November 17, 2008, at the age of 92, deHavilland received the National Medal of Arts, the highest honor conferred to an individual artist on behalf of the people of the United States. The medal was presented to her by President George W. Bush, who commended her "for her persuasive and compelling skill as an actress in roles from Shakespeare's Hermia to Margaret Mitchell's Melanie. Her independence, integrity, and grace won creative freedom for herself and her fellow film actors." The following year, deHavilland narrated the documentary "I Remember Better When I Paint" (2009), a film about the importance of art in the treatment of Alzheimer's disease.

On September 9, 2010, deHavilland was appointed a "Chevalier" (knight) of the Légion d'honneur, the highest decoration in France, awarded by French President Nicolas Sarkozy, who told the actress, "You honor France for having chosen us." In February the following year, she appeared at the César Awards in France, where she was greeted with a standing ovation. DeHavilland celebrated her 100th birthday on July 1, 2016.

In June 2017, two weeks before her 101st birthday, de Havilland was appointed Dame Commander of the Order of the British Empire in the 2017 Birthday Honours for services to drama. She is the oldest woman ever to receive the honour. In a statement, she called it "the most gratifying of birthday presents".

Although known as one of Hollywood's most exciting on-screen couples, deHavilland and Errol Flynn were never involved in a romantic relationship. Upon first meeting her at Warner Bros. in August 1935, Flynn was drawn to the 19-year-old actress with "warm brown eyes" and "extraordinary charm". In turn, deHavilland fell in love with him, but kept her feelings inside. Flynn later wrote, "By the time we made "The Charge of the Light Brigade", I was sure that I was in love with her." Flynn finally professed his love on March 12, 1937, at the Coronation Ball for King George VI at the Ambassador Hotel in Los Angeles, where they slow danced together to "Sweet Leilani" at the hotel's Coconut Grove nightclub. "I was deeply affected by him," she later remembered, "It was impossible for me not to be." The evening ended on a sobering note, however, with deHavilland insisting that despite his separation from his wife Lili Damita, he needed to divorce her before their relationship could proceed. Flynn reunited with his wife later that year, and deHavilland never acted on her feelings for Flynn.

In July 1938, deHavilland began dating business tycoon, aviator, and filmmaker Howard Hughes, who had just completed his record-setting flight around the world in 91 hours. In addition to escorting her about town, he gave the actress her first flying lessons. She later said, "He was a rather shy man ... and yet, in a whole community where the men every day played heroes on the screen and didn't do anything heroic in life, here was this man who was a real hero." In December 1939, she began a romantic relationship with actor James Stewart. At the request of Irene Mayer Selznick, the actor's agent asked Stewart to escort deHavilland to the New York premiere of "Gone with the Wind" at the Astor Theater on December 19, 1939. Over the next few days, Stewart took her to the theater several times and to the 21 Club. They continued to see each other back in Los Angeles, where Stewart provided occasional flying lessons and romance. According to deHavilland, Stewart proposed marriage to her in 1940, but she felt that he was not ready to settle down. Their relationship ended in late 1941 when deHavilland began a romantic relationship with film director John Huston while making "In This Our Life". "John was a very great love of mine", she would later admit, "He was a man I wanted to marry."

On August 26, 1946, she married Marcus Goodrich, a Navy veteran, journalist, and author of the 1941 novel "Delilah". The marriage ended in divorce in 1953. They had one child, Benjamin Goodrich, who was born on September 27, 1949. He was diagnosed with Hodgkin's lymphoma at the age of 19, but was able to graduate from the University of Texas. He worked as a statistical analyst for Lockheed Missiles and Space Company in Sunnyvale, California, and as an international banking representative for the Texas Commerce Bank in Houston. He died on October 1, 1991, in Paris at the age of 41 of heart disease brought on by treatments for Hodgkin's disease, three weeks before the death of his father.

On April 2, 1955, deHavilland married Pierre Galante, an executive editor for the French journal "Paris Match". Her marriage to Galante prompted her relocation to Paris. The couple separated in 1962, but continued to live in the same house for another six years to raise their daughter together. Galante moved across the street and the two remained close, even after the finalization of the divorce in 1979. She looked after him during his final bout with lung cancer prior to his death in 1998. They had one child, Gisèle Galante, who was born on July 18, 1956. After studying law at the Université de Droit de Nanterre School of Law, she worked as a journalist in France and the United States. Since 1956, deHavilland has lived in the same three-story house near Bois de Boulogne park in the "Rive Droite" section of Paris.

DeHavilland was raised in the Episcopal Church and has remained an Episcopalian throughout her life. After moving to France, she became one of the first women lectors at the American Cathedral in Paris, where she was on the regular rota for Scripture readings. As recently as 2012, she was doing readings on major feast days, including Christmas and Easter. "It's a task I love", she once said. In describing her preparation for her readings, she once observed, "You have to convey the deep meaning, you see, and it has to start with your own faith. But first I always pray. I pray before I start to prepare, as well. In fact, I would always say a prayer before shooting a scene, so this is not so different, in a way." DeHavilland prefers to use the Revised English Bible for its poetic style. She raised her son Benjamin in the Episcopal Church and her daughter Gisèle in the Roman Catholic Church, the faith of each child's father.

As a United States citizen, deHavilland became involved in politics as a way of exercising her civic responsibilities. She campaigned for Franklin D. Roosevelt's re-election in 1944. After the war, she joined the Independent Citizens' Committee of the Arts, Sciences and Professions, a national public policy advocacy group that included Bette Davis, Gregory Peck and Humphrey Bogart in its Hollywood chapter. In June 1946, she was asked to deliver speeches for the committee that reflected the Communist Party linethe group was later identified as a Communist front organization. Disturbed at seeing a small group of Communist members manipulating the committee, she removed the pro-Communist material from her speeches and rewrote them to reflect Harry S. Truman's anti-Communist platform. She later recalled, "I realized a nucleus of people was controlling the organization without a majority of the members of the board being aware of it. And I knew they had to be Communists."

She organized a fight to regain control of the committee from its pro-Soviet leadership, but her reform efforts failed. Her resignation from the committee triggered a wave of resignations from 11 other Hollywood figures, including future President Ronald Reagan. In 1958, she was secretly called before the House Un-American Activities Committee and recounted her experiences with the Independent Citizens' Committee.

De Havilland and her sister Joan Fontaine are the only siblings to have won Academy Awards in a lead acting category. According to biographer Charles Higham, the sisters always had an uneasy relationship, starting in early childhood when Olivia had trouble accepting the idea of having a younger sister, and Joan resenting her mother's favoring Olivia. Olivia would rip up the clothes that her sister was given to wear as hand-me-downs, forcing Joan to stitch them together again. This tension was made worse by Fontaine's frequent childhood illnesses, which led to her mother's overly protective expression, "Livvie can, Joan can't." DeHavilland was the first to become an actress, and for several years Fontaine was overshadowed by her sister's accomplishments. When Mervyn LeRoy offered Fontaine a personal contract, her mother told her that Warner Bros. was "Olivia's studio" and that she could not use the family name, "deHavilland".

In 1942, deHavilland and Fontaine were both nominated for an Academy Award for Best ActressdeHavilland for "Hold Back the Dawn" and Fontaine for "Suspicion". When Fontaine's name was announced as winner, deHavilland reacted graciously saying, "We've got it!" According to biographer Charles Higham, Fontaine rejected deHavilland's attempts to congratulate her, leaving the other offended and embarrassed.

Their relationship was further strained in 1946 when Fontaine made negative comments to an interviewer about deHavilland's new husband, Marcus Goodrich. When she read her sister's remarks, deHavilland was deeply hurt and waited for an apology that was never offered. The following year after accepting her first Academy Award for "To Each His Own", deHavilland was approached backstage by Fontaine, who extended her hand to congratulate her; deHavilland turned away from her sister. The two did not speak for the next five years after the incident. This may have caused an estrangement between Fontaine and her own daughters, who maintained a covert relationship with their aunt, deHavilland.

Following her divorce from Goodrich, deHavilland resumed contact with her sister, coming to her apartment in New York and spending Christmas together there in 1961. The final break between the sisters occurred in 1975 over disagreements over their mother's cancer treatmentdeHavilland wanted to consult other doctors and supported exploratory surgery; Fontaine disagreed. Fontaine later claimed her sister had not notified her of their mother's death while she was touring with a playdeHavilland in fact had sent a telegram, which took two weeks to reach her sister. The sibling feud ended with Fontaine's death on December 15, 2013. The following day, deHavilland released a statement saying she was "shocked and saddened" by the news.

DeHavilland's career spanned 53 years, from 1935 to 1988. During that time, she appeared in 49 feature films, and was one of the leading movie stars during the golden age of Classical Hollywood. She began her career playing demure ingénues opposite popular male stars, including Errol Flynn, with whom she made her breakout film "Captain Blood" in 1935. They would go on to make eight more feature films together, and became one of Hollywood's most popular romantic on-screen pairings. Her range of performances included roles in most major movie genres. Following her film debut in the Shakespeare adaptation "A Midsummer Night's Dream", deHavilland achieved her initial popularity in romantic comedies, such as "The Great Garrick" and "Hard to Get", and Western adventure films, such as "Dodge City" and "Santa Fe Trail". In her later career, she was most successful in drama films, such as "In This Our Life" and "Light in the Piazza", and psychological dramas playing non-glamorous characters in films such as "The Dark Mirror", "The Snake Pit", and "Hush... Hush, Sweet Charlotte".

During her career, deHavilland won two Academy Awards ("To Each His Own" and "The Heiress"), two Golden Globe Awards ("The Heiress" and "Anastasia: The Mystery of Anna"), two New York Film Critics Circle Awards ("The Snake Pit" and "The Heiress"), the National Board of Review Award, and the Venice Film Festival Volpi Cup ("The Snake Pit"), and a Primetime Emmy Award nomination ("Anastasia: The Mystery of Anna").

For her contributions to the motion picture industry, deHavilland received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame at 6762 Hollywood Boulevard on February 8, 1960. Since her retirement in 1988, her lifetime contribution to the arts has been honored on two continents. In 1998, she received an honorary doctorate from the University of Hertfordshire in England.

In 2006, she was inducted into the Online Film & Television Association Award Film Hall of Fame. On November 17, 2008, President George W. Bush presented deHavilland the National Medal of Arts, the highest honor given for achievement in the arts conferred to an individual artist on behalf of the American people. On September 9, 2010, deHavilland was appointed a "Chevalier" (knight) of the Légion d'honneur, the highest decoration in France, awarded by French President Nicolas Sarkozy.

The moving-image collection of Olivia de Havilland is held at the Academy Film Archive, which preserved a nitrate reel of a screen test for "Danton", Max Reinhardt’s never-produced follow-up to "A Midsummer Night’s Dream" (1935).

De Havilland, as a confidante and friend of Bette Davis, is featured in the series "Feud: Bette and Joan", portrayed by Catherine Zeta-Jones. In the series deHavilland reflects on the origins and depth of the Davis-Crawford feud and how it affected contemporary female Hollywood stars. On June 30, 2017, a day before her 101st birthday, she filed a lawsuit against FX Networks and producer Ryan Murphy for inaccurately portraying her and using her likeness without permission. Although FX attempted to strike the suit, Los Angeles County Superior Court Judge Holly Kendig ruled in de Havilland's favor, and granted de Havilland an advanced court date of November 27, 2017.





</doc>
<doc id="61350" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61350" title="Claudette Colbert">
Claudette Colbert

Claudette Colbert (September 13, 1903 – July 30, 1996) was an American film actress and a leading lady in Hollywood for over two decades, and has been called "The mixture of inimitable beauty, sophistication, wit, and vivacity".

Colbert began her career in Broadway productions during the late 1920s and progressed to motion pictures with the advent of sound film. Initially associated with Paramount Pictures, Colbert gradually shifted to working as a freelance actress. She won the Academy Award for Best Actress in "It Happened One Night" (1934), and received two other Academy Award nominations. Other notable films include "Cleopatra" (1934) and "The Palm Beach Story" (1942).

With her round apple-face, big eyes, charm, aristocratic manner, and flair for light comedy as well as emotional drama, Colbert was known for a versatility that led to her becoming one of the best-paid stars of the 1930s and 1940s. During her career, Colbert starred in more than sixty movies. She was the industry's highest-paid star in 1938 and 1942. Among her frequent co-stars were Fred MacMurray in seven films (1935−1949), and Fredric March in four films (1930−1933).

By the early 1950s, Colbert had basically retired from the screen in favor of television and stage work, and she earned a Tony Award nomination for "The Marriage-Go-Round" in 1959. Her career tapered off during the early 1960s, but in the late 1970s she experienced a career resurgence in theater, earning a Sarah Siddons Award for her Chicago theater work in 1980. For her television work in "The Two Mrs. Grenvilles" (1987) she won a Golden Globe Award and received an Emmy Award nomination.

In 1999, the American Film Institute posthumously voted Colbert the 12th Greatest Female star of classic Hollywood cinema.

Émilie "Lily" Claudette Chauchoin (pronounced “show-shwan”) was born in 1903 in Saint-Mandé, France, to Georges Claude Chauchoin (1867–1925) and Jeanne Marie (née Loew, 1877–1970). Although christened "Émilie," she was called "Lily," because she had an aunt living with her by the name of Émilie. The aunt was her maternal grandmother's adopted child, Emilie Loew (1878–1954), who was not a blood relative, worked as a dressmaker, and never married. Colbert's nickname "Lily" came from Jersey-born actress Lillie Langtry. Jeanne, Emilie Loew and Colbert's grandmother Marie Augustine Loew (1842–1930) were born in the Channel Islands in the British Isles, and they were already fluent English speakers before coming to the U.S., though French and English were spoken in the family circle. Colbert's brother, Charles Auguste Chauchoin (1898–1971), was also born in Jersey. Jeanne held various occupations. While Georges Chauchoin had lost the sight in his right eye and hadn't settled into a profession, he worked as investment banker, suffering business setbacks. Marie Loew had already been to the U.S., and Georges' brother-in-law (surname Vedel) was already living in New York City. Marie was willing to help Georges financially but also encouraged him to try his luck in the U.S.

In order to pursue more employment opportunities, Colbert and her family, including Marie and Emilie Loew, emigrated to Manhattan in 1906. They lived in a fifth-floor walk-up at 53rd Street. Colbert stated that climbing those stairs to the fifth floor every day until 1922 made her legs beautiful. Her parents formally changed her legal name to Lily Claudette Chauchoin. Georges Chauchoin worked as a minor official at First National City Bank. Before Colbert entered public school, she quickly learned English from her grandmother Marie Loew and remained fluent in French. She had hoped to become a painter ever since she had grasped her first pencil. Her family was naturalized in the U.S. in 1912. Her mother wanted to become an opera singer. After all, Jeanne joined two silent films "Journey's End" (1918) and "The Poison Pen" (1919) in supporting roles as Jeanne Loew.

Colbert studied at Washington Irving High School (known for having a strong arts program), where her speech teacher, Alice Rossetter, encouraged her to audition for a play Rossetter had written. In 1919, Colbert made her stage debut at the Provincetown Playhouse in "The Widow's Veil" at the age of 15. However, Colbert’s interest still leaned towards painting, fashion design, and commercial art.

Intending to become a fashion designer, she attended the Art Students League of New York, where she paid for her art education by working as a dress-shop employee. After attending a party with writer Anne Morrison, Colbert was offered a bit part in Morrison's play and appeared on the Broadway stage in a small role in "The Wild Westcotts" (1923). She had been using the name Claudette instead of her first name Lily since high school, and for her stage name she added her maternal grandmother's maiden name Colbert. She was a staunch Republican since she was young. Her father Georges died in 1925 and her grandmother Marie Loew died in New York in 1930.

After signing a five-year contract with producer Al Woods, Colbert played ingenue roles on Broadway from 1925 through 1929. During this period she disliked being typecast as a French maid. Colbert later said, "In the very beginning, they wanted to give me French roles … That’s why I used to say my name Col-bert just as it is spelled instead of Col-baire. I did not want to be typed as 'that French girl. She received critical acclaim on Broadway in the production of "The Barker" (1927) as a carnival snake charmer. She reprised this role for the play's run in London's West End. Colbert was noticed by the theatrical producer Leland Hayward, who suggested her for the heroine role in "For the Love of Mike" (1927), a silent film now believed to be lost. The film didn't fare well enough at the box-office.

In 1928, Colbert signed a contract with Paramount Pictures, which was looking for stage actors who could handle dialogue in the new "talkies" medium. Colbert's elegance and musical voice was one of her best assets, In "The Hole in the Wall" (1929), audiences noticed her beauty, but at first she didn't like film acting. Her earliest films were produced in New York. During production of the 1929 film "The Lady Lies", she was appearing nightly in the play "See Naples and Die". 
"The Lady Lies" was also a box office success. In 1930 she starred opposite Maurice Chevalier in "The Big Pond", which was filmed in both English and French. She co-starred with Fredric March in "Manslaughter" (1930), receiving critical acclaim for her performance as a woman charged with vehicular manslaughter. She was paired with March in four productions, including "Honor Among Lovers" (1931) with Ginger Rogers. While these films were box office successes, she also starred in "Mysterious Mr. Parkes" (1931), which was a French-language version of "Slightly Scarlet" for the European market, although it was also screened in the United States. She sang and played piano in the Ernst Lubitsch musical "The Smiling Lieutenant" (1931), which was the year's 10th domestic box-office success; Colbert was critically acclaimed for her ability to shrewdly play a character role opposite Miriam Hopkins. Colbert concluded the year with appearance in a modest successful film: "His Woman" with Gary Cooper.

Colbert's career got a huge boost when Cecil B. DeMille cast her as "femme fatale" in the 1932 historical epic "The Sign of the Cross ", opposite Fredric March and Charles Laughton. In one of the most notable scenes in her movie career, she bathes nude in a marble pool filled with asses' milk. The film was one of her biggest box-office hits.

In 1933, Colbert renegotiated her contract with Paramount to allow her to appear in films for other studios. Her musical voice was also featured in the 1933 film "Torch Singer", which co-starred Ricardo Cortez and David Manners.

For 1933, she was already ranking as 13th box-office star. By 1933, she had appeared in 20 films, averaging approximately four films per year. A lot of her early films were commercial successes, and her performances were admired. Her leading roles were serious and diverse, which proved her versatility.

Colbert was initially reluctant to appear in the screwball comedy "It Happened One Night" (1934). The studio accepted Colbert's demand that she be paid $50,000 and that filming was to be completed within four weeks to allow her to take a planned vacation. Colbert won the Academy Award for Best Actress for the film.

In "Cleopatra" (1934), she played the title role opposite Warren William and Henry Wilcoxon. The film was one of the year's biggest domestic box-office hits. Thereafter, Colbert did not wish to be portrayed as overtly sexual and later refused such roles."Imitation of Life" (1934) was the year's 8th domestic box-office success.

Colbert's rising popularity allowed her to renegotiate her contract, which raised her salary. For 1935 and 1936, she was listed 6th and 8th in the annual "Top Ten Money Making Stars Poll". Then she received an Academy Award nomination for her role in the hospital drama "Private Worlds" (1935).

In 1936, Colbert signed a new contract with Paramount Pictures, and this contract made her Hollywood's highest-paid actress. This was followed by a contract renewal in 1938, after which she was reported to be the best-paid star in Hollywood with a salary of $426,924. At the peak of her popularity in the late 1930s, Colbert earned $150,000 a film. Colbert spent the rest of the 1930s deftly alternating between romantic comedies and dramas, and found success in both: "She Married Her Boss" (1935) with Melvyn Douglas; "The Gilded Lily" (1935) and "The Bride Comes Home" (1935), both with Fred MacMurray; "Under Two Flags" (1936) with Ronald Colman; "Zaza" (1939) with Herbert Marshall; "Midnight" (1939) with Don Ameche; and "It's a Wonderful World" (1939) with James Stewart.

In contrast to her small height image, Colbert was tall. Hedda Hopper wrote that Colbert placed her career "ahead of everything save possibly her marriage", with a strong sense of what was best for her, and a "deep-rooted desire to be in shape, efficient and under control." The writer A. Scott Berg remarked that Colbert had "helped define femininity for her generation with her chic manner." Colbert once said, "I’ve been in the Claudette Colbert business a long time."

Colbert was a stickler for perfection regarding the way she appeared on screen. She believed that her face was difficult to light and photograph, and was obsessed with not showing the right side of her face to the camera, because of a small bump resulting from a childhood broken nose. She often refused to be filmed from the right side of her face, and this sometimes necessitated redesigning movie sets. During the filming of "Tovarich" in 1937, one of her favored cameramen was dismissed by the director, Anatole Litvak. After seeing the rushes filmed by the replacement, Colbert refused to continue. She insisted on hiring her own cameraman, and offered to waive her salary if the film went over budget as a result. Gary Cooper was terrified at the prospect of working with Colbert in his first comedy, "Bluebeard's Eighth Wife" (1938), which was the year's 15th domestic box-office success. Cooper respected Colbert to be an expert in the genre. She learned about lighting and cinematography, and refused to begin filming until she was satisfied that she would be shown to her best advantage. "Drums Along the Mohawk" (1939) with Henry Fonda was Colbert's first color film, which was the year's 6th domestic box-office success. However, she distrusted the relatively new Technicolor process and feared that she would not photograph well, preferring thereafter to be filmed in black and white.

During this time she began appearing for CBS's popular radio program "Lux Radio Theater", making 22 episodes between 1935 and 1954. She also appeared for another radio program, "The Screen Guild Theater", making 13 episodes between 1939 and 1952.

In 1940, Colbert refused a seven-year contract with Paramount, that would have paid her $200,000 a year, after finding out that she could command a fee of $150,000 per film as a freelance artist. With her manager, Colbert was able to secure roles in prestigious films, and this period marked the height of her earning ability. "Boom Town" (1940) was the year's 3rd domestic box-office hit. However, Colbert once said that "Arise, My Love" (1940) was her favorite of all her movies. The film won the Academy Award for Best Story.

During filming of "So Proudly We Hail!" (1943), a rift occurred between Colbert and co-star Paulette Goddard, who preferred another co-star Veronica Lake rather than Colbert. Goddard commented that Colbert "flipped" and "was at [my] eyes at every moment", and said that they continued their feud throughout the duration of filming. Colbert was otherwise known for maintaining particularly high standards of professionalism and qualities during shooting. The 1943 film was the year's 12th domestic box-office success. Impressed by Colbert's role in "So Proudly We Hail!," David O. Selznick approached her to play the lead role in "Since You Went Away" (1944). She was initially reluctant to appear as a mother of teenaged children, but Selznick eventually overcame her sensitivity. Released in June 1944, the film was the year's 4th domestic box-office hit. and grossed almost $5 million in the United States. The critic James Agee praised aspects of the film, but particularly Colbert's work. Partly as a result, she received an Academy Award nomination for Best Actress.

In 1945, Colbert ended her association with Paramount Studios and continued to freelance in such films as "Guest Wife" (1945), with Don Ameche. She starred opposite John Wayne in the RKO Studios film "Without Reservations" (1946), which grossed $3 million in the U.S. While working on "Without Reservations", director Mervyn LeRoy described Colbert as an interesting lady to work with, recalling her habit of not watching where she was going and constantly bumping into things. Praised for her sense of style and awareness of fashion, Colbert ensured throughout her career that she was impeccably groomed and costumed. For the 1946 melodrama "Tomorrow Is Forever," Jean Louis was hired to create eighteen changes of wardrobe for her. "Tomorrow is Forever" and "The Secret Heart" (1946) were also substantial commercial successes, and the overall popularity of Colbert during 1947 led her to place 9th in the "Top Ten Money Making Stars Poll."

She achieved great success opposite Fred MacMurray in the comedy "The Egg and I" (1947). The film was the year's 8th domestic box-office hit and was later acknowledged as the 12th most profitable American film of the 1940s. The suspense film "Sleep, My Love" (1948) with Robert Cummings was a modest commercial success. By 1949 she was still ranking as the 22nd highest box-office star.

The romantic comedy, "Bride for Sale" (1949), in which Colbert played part of a love triangle that included George Brent and Robert Young, was well-reviewed. Her performance in the Pacific war film "Three Came Home" (1950) was also praised by the critics. However, "The Secret Fury" (1950), distributed by RKO Studios, was a mystery melodrama that received mixed reviews. During this period Colbert was unable to work beyond 5 p.m. each day due to doctor's orders. While Colbert still looked like a young woman, she found it difficult to make the transition to playing more mature characters as she approached middle age. Colbert once said, "I'm a very good comedienne, but I was always fighting that image, too."

In 1949, Colbert was selected to play Margo Channing in "All About Eve," because producer Joseph L. Mankiewicz felt that she best represented the style he envisioned for the part. However, Colbert severely injured her back, which led her to abandon the picture shortly before filming began. The role went instead to Bette Davis, who was nominated for an Academy Award for her performace. In later life, Colbert said, "I just never had the luck to play bitches."

For tax reasons Colbert traveled to Europe, making fewer films in the early 1950s. She appeared in "Royal Affairs in Versailles" with Orson Welles, the only film in which she acted for a French director, although Colbert had only a supporting role rather than top billing. This film was screened in the United States in 1957.

In 1954 Colbert turned down a million-dollar broadcast deal with NBC-TV, but made a pact with CBS-TV to star in several teleplays. After a successful appearance in a television version of "The Royal Family," she began acting in various television programs. From 1954 to 1960, she starred in television adaptations of "Blithe Spirit" in 1956 and "The Bells of St. Mary's" in 1959. She also guest starred on "Robert Montgomery Presents," "Playhouse 90," and "Zane Grey Theater."

In 1956, Colbert hosted the 28th Academy Awards ceremony.

In 1958, she returned to Broadway in "The Marriage-Go-Round", for which she was nominated for a Best Actress Tony Award.

She made a brief return to the screen, opposite Troy Donahue in "Parrish" (1961). The movie was her last appearance on the big screen, and she played the supporting role of the mother. The film was the year's 19th domestic box-office hit. However, Colbert received little attention from the press. After that, Colbert instructed her agent to stop his attempts to generate interest in her as a film actress, because there had been no offers.

Colbert made occasional successful acting ventures in Broadway appearances in "The Irregular Verb to Love" (1963), "The Kingfisher" (1978) in which she co-starred with Rex Harrison, and Frederick Lonsdale's "Aren't We All?" (1985), also with Rex Harrison. Colbert once said to an interviewer, "Audiences always sound like they're glad to see me, and I'm damned glad to see them."　

In 1987, Colbert appeared in a supporting role in the television miniseries "The Two Mrs. Grenvilles." The production was a ratings success. Colbert won a Golden Globe and received a nomination for an Emmy Award.

Modern critics have pointed out that Colbert had a mixture of unique physical assets (her round apple-face, big eyes, curly hair, slender body), an elegant voice, aristocratic manner, relaxed acting, a tongue-in-cheek vivacity, intelligent style, comedic timing and ladylike alluring charm, that distinguishes her from other screwball comediennes of the 1930s. In her comedy films, she invariably played shrewd and self-reliant women, but unlike many of her contemporaries, Colbert rarely engaged in physical comedy. Her characters were more likely to be observers and commentators.

In 1928, Colbert married Norman Foster, an actor and director, with whom she co-starred in the Broadway show "The Barker," and in the 1930 film "Young Man of Manhattan," for which he received negative reviews as one of her weakest leading men. Their marriage remained a secret for many years while they lived in separate homes. 

In Los Angeles, Colbert shared a home with her mother, Jeanne Chauchoin, but her domineering mother disliked Foster and reputedly did not allow him into the home. Colbert and Foster divorced in 1935 in Mexico.

Four months after her divorce, Colbert married Joel Pressman, a throat specialist and surgeon at UCLA. She gave a Beechcraft Bonanza single-engine plane to Pressman as a present. They purchased a ranch in Northern California, where Colbert enjoyed horseback riding and her husband kept show cattle. During this period, Colbert drove a Lincoln Continental and a Ford Thunderbird. The marriage lasted 33 years, until Pressman's death from liver cancer in 1968.

Jeanne Chauchoin reportedly envied her daughter and preferred her son's company, making Colbert's brother Charles serve as his sister's agent. Charles used the surname Wendling which was borrowed from Jeanne's paternal grandmother, Rose Wendling. He served as Colbert's business manager for a time, and was credited with negotiating some of her more lucrative contracts in the late 1930s and early 1940s. Although virtually retired from the motion-picture industry since the mid-1950s, Colbert was still financially solvent enough to maintain an upscale lifestyle. Despite already having a country house in Palm Springs for staying on weekends, she rented a cottage in Cap Ferrat in southeastern France. Adman Peter Rogers said, "Claudette was extravagant; I never, ever saw her question the price of anything." In 1963, Colbert sold her residence in Holmby Hills (western Los Angeles), so Joel Pressman rented a small house in Beverly Hills.

In 1958 she met Verna Hull, a wealthy painter/photographer and the stepdaughter of a Sears Roebuck heiress. They had a nine-year friendship and painted together, went for drives together, traveled together and even rented twin penthouses in New York. They had a mutual interest in art. When Colbert bought a house in Barbados in the early 1960s, Hull also bought a modest house next door. The friendship ended suddenly after an argument that took place as Colbert's husband lay dying. Colbert denied, and took offence at, lesbian rumours.

For years, Colbert divided her time between her apartment in Manhattan and her vacation home in Speightstown, Barbados. The latter, purchased from a British gentleman and nicknamed "Bellerive", was the island’s only plantation house fronting the beach. However, her permanent address remained Manhattan.

Colbert's mother Jeanne died in 1970 and her brother Charles died in 1971, so her only surviving relative was a niece, Coco Lewis, Charles' daughter.

Colbert sustained a series of small strokes during the last three years of her life. She died in 1996 at her second home in Barbados, where she had employed a housekeeper and two cooks. Colbert’s remains were transported to New York City for cremation and funeral services. 

A Requiem Mass was later held at Church of St. Vincent Ferrer in Manhattan. Her ashes were buried in the Godings Bay Church Cemetery, Speightstown, Saint Peter, Barbados, alongside her mother and second husband.

Colbert was childless. She left most of her estate, estimated at $3.5 million and also including her Manhattan apartment and Bellerive, to a long-time friend, Helen O'Hagan, a retired director of corporate relations at Saks Fifth Avenue. Colbert had met O'Hagan in 1961 on the set of "Parrish," her last film, and the pair became best friends around 1970. 

After the death of Pressman, Colbert instructed her friends to treat O'Hagan as they had Pressman, "as her spouse". Though O'Hagan was financially comfortable without the generous bequest, Bellerive was sold for over $2 million to David Geffen. Colbert's remaining assets were distributed among three heirs: $150,000 to her niece Coco Lewis; a trust worth more than $100,000 to UCLA for Pressman’s memory; and $75,000 to Marie Corbin, Colbert's Barbadian housekeeper.

The following is a list of feature films in which Colbert had top billing.





</doc>
<doc id="186041" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=186041" title="Ellen Burstyn">
Ellen Burstyn

Ellen Burstyn (born Edna Rae Gillooly; December 7, 1932) is an American actress.

Her career began in theatre during the late 1950s, and over the next decade included several films and television series. Burstyn is one of the few performers to have won the Triple Crown of Acting. In 2013, she was inducted into the American Theatre Hall of Fame. Her performance in the acclaimed 1971 ensemble drama "The Last Picture Show" brought her first Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress nomination, after which she moved from supporting to leading film and stage roles. Burstyn received a second Academy Award nomination for her lead performance in William Friedkin's classic horror film "The Exorcist" (1973), and won the Academy Award for Best Actress the following year for her role as a widowed drifter in Martin Scorsese's "Alice Doesn't Live Here Anymore".

In 1975, she won the Tony Award for her lead performance in the Broadway production of "Same Time, Next Year", and received a Golden Globe Award and a fourth Academy Award nomination for her performance in the 1978 film version of the play. Burstyn has worked consistently in film, television, and theatre since then, receiving multiple awards and nominations along the way, including seven additional Golden Globe Award nominations, five Emmy Award nominations (two wins), and two more Academy Award for Best Actress nominations for her performances in the films "Resurrection" (1980) and "Requiem for a Dream" (2000).

Burstyn was born Edna Rae Gillooly in Detroit, Michigan, the daughter of Correine Marie (née Hamel) and John Austin Gillooly. She has described her ancestry as "Irish, French, Pennsylvania Dutch, a little Canadian Indian." Burstyn has an older brother, Jack, and a younger brother, Steve. Her parents divorced when she was young, and her brothers and she lived with her mother and her stepfather.

She attended Cass Technical High School, a university-preparatory school which allowed students to choose a specific field of study. Burstyn majored in fashion illustration. In high school, she was a cheerleader, a member of the student council, and president of her junior class. She dropped out of high school during her senior year after failing her classes. After dropping out of school, Burstyn got a job as a model in a Detroit department store. She later relocated to Dallas, where she continued modeling before traveling to New York City.

From 1955 to 1956, Burstyn appeared as an "away we go" dancing girl on "The Jackie Gleason Show" under the name Erica Dean. Burstyn then decided to become an actress and chose the name "Ellen McRae" as her professional name; she later changed her surname after her 1964 marriage to Neil Burstyn.

Burstyn debuted on Broadway in 1957 and joined Lee Strasberg's The Actors Studio in New York City in 1967. In 1975, she won a Tony Award for Best Performance by a Leading Actress in a Play for her performance in the comedy "Same Time, Next Year" (a role she would reprise in the film version in 1978).

Starting in the late 1950s and continuing throughout the 1960s, Burstyn frequently played guest roles on a number of primetime television shows, including "Dr. Kildare", "77 Sunset Strip", "Ben Casey", "Gunsmoke", "Perry Mason", "Wagon Train", "The Big Valley", and "The Virginian". During 1964-1965, she had a recurring role as Dr. Kate Bartok on the NBC daytime television soap opera "The Doctors". In 1967-1968, she co-starred as Julie Parsons opposite Dale Robertson in the ABC Western "The Iron Horse". She was credited as Ellen McRae until 1967, when she and her then-husband Neil Nephew both changed their surname to Burstyn and she began to be credited as Ellen Burstyn.

In 1971, Burstyn was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress for her role in the drama film "The Last Picture Show" (her co-star Cloris Leachman won) and nominated for Best Actress in 1973 for the horror film "The Exorcist". During the filming of "The Exorcist", she injured her coccyx, which led to permanent injury to her spine. She won the Academy Award for Best Actress in 1974 for her performance in the drama "Alice Doesn't Live Here Anymore", directed by Martin Scorsese. She also received Best Actress nominations in 1978 for "Same Time, Next Year", in 1980 for the drama "Resurrection", and for the drama "Requiem for a Dream" in 2000.

In 1977, she was a member of the jury at the 27th Berlin International Film Festival, and in 1988, she was a member of the jury for the 38th Berlin International Film Festival. Burstyn hosted NBC's "Saturday Night Live", a late-night sketch comedy and variety show, in December 1980.

In 1986, Burstyn starred in her own ABC television situation comedy, "The Ellen Burstyn Show" costarring Megan Mullally as her daughter and Elaine Stritch as her mother; it was cancelled after one season.

In 1990, Burstyn won the Sarah Siddons Award for her work in Chicago theatre.

In 2000, she starred in the film adaptation of "Requiem for a Dream", for which she was nominated for an Academy Award.

From 2000 to 2002, Burstyn appeared in the CBS television drama "That's Life". In January 2006, she starred as an Episcopal bishop in the NBC comedy-drama series "The Book of Daniel". The series, which also starred Aidan Quinn as a drug-addicted Episcopal priest married to an alcoholic wife, was met with controversy from religious and spiritual leaders due to its unconventional portrayals of religious figures. Conservative groups including American Family Association and Focus on the Family urged supporters to complain to NBC affiliates that carried the show. NBC pulled the series from its lineup after four episodes, but did not publicly give a reason for doing so.
In 2006, Burstyn appeared in the drama-romance film "The Fountain", directed by Darren Aronofsky, with whom she worked in "Requiem for a Dream". Since 2007, she has had an occasional recurring role on the HBO television drama series "Big Love", playing the mother of polygamist wife Barbara Henrickson.

She provided a supporting role as the mother of two sons in the drama-romance film "The Elephant King". The film originally premiered at the 2006 Tribeca Film Festival, but did not open in U.S. theaters until October 2008.

Burstyn starred in the Broadway production of Martin Tahse's "Oldest Living Confederate Widow Tells All", based upon the novel of the same title by Allan Gurganus. The show played 19 previews and officially opened November 17, 2003. Because of unfavorable reviews, all performances after the opening night were cancelled. Burstyn returned to the stage in March 2008, in the off-Broadway production of Stephen Adly Guirgis's "The Little Flower of East Orange", directed by Philip Seymour Hoffman in a coproduction by LAByrinth Theater Company and The Public Theater.

In addition to her stage work, Burstyn portrayed former First Lady Barbara Bush in director Oliver Stone's biographical film "W" in 2008. In 2009, she won a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Guest Actress in a Drama Series for her portrayal of the bipolar estranged mother of Detective Elliot Stabler on NBC's police procedural "".

In 2014, Burstyn appeared in Christopher Nolan's science-fiction epic "Interstellar". She had played Mackenzie Foy's character's grandmother in "Wish You Well" the previous year, and both actresses portrayed "Murph" Cooper, albeit at radically different ages, in "Interstellar".

Burstyn played Flemming, the daughter of Blake Lively's immortal character, in the film "The Age of Adaline". Production started in March 2014, and the film was released in April 2015.

In 2014, Burstyn announced to direct her first feature film, "Bathing Flo".

Ellen Burstyn is currently in development with Peter Livolsi's film "The House of Tomorrow" about her friend R. Buckminster Fuller, in which she stars and is a producer.

Burstyn was nominated for an Emmy Award for Outstanding Actress in a Miniseries or Movie, for her role as Jean Harris in the biographical television film "The People vs. Jean Harris" (1981) and again for another television drama film, "Pack of Lies" (1987), an adaptation of the 1983 play. In 2006, she was nominated for an Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Miniseries or Movie for a role credited as Former Tarnower Steady in HBO's biographical television film "Mrs. Harris".

Soon after the nominations were announced, an outcry ensued from the press and the public regarding the worthiness of the nomination due to her minor role in the film, consisting of 14 seconds of screen time and 38 words of dialogue. One explanation for the nomination was that people were honoring Burstyn for her nominated but nonwinning performance in the first "Harris" television film. A more popular accusation was that the nominating committee was either confused in its recollection, or merely "threw in" her name from sheer recognition, assuming a worthy performance without actually seeing it.

The Academy of Television Arts and Sciences, administrator of the Primetime Emmy Awards, initially insisted that "based on the popular vote, this is a legitimate nomination". Meanwhile, HBO deflected the blame for submitting the nomination to the movie-production company. Burstyn's own reaction ranged from initial silence to comments such as, "I thought it was fabulous. My next ambition is to get nominated for seven seconds, and ultimately I want to be nominated for a picture in which I don't even appear," and "This doesn't have anything to do with me. I don't even want to know about this. You people work it out yourself."

Ultimately, Kelly Macdonald, who starred in "The Girl in the Cafe", won the award.
In March 2007, the academy officially announced that eligibility for a Primetime Emmy Award in any long-form supporting-actor category required nominees to appear on-screen in at least 5% of the project.

Many critics still cite this incident to criticize the Emmy Award nomination process, claiming that name recognition has played an increasingly visible role over the years.

In 2013, she won the Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Miniseries or a Movie for "Political Animals", and referenced the controversy in her acceptance speech.

During the 1970s, Burstyn was active in the movement to free convicted boxer Rubin "Hurricane" Carter from jail.

In 1981, Burstyn recorded "The Ballad of the Nazi Soldier's Wife" (Kurt Weill's musical setting of Bertolt Brecht's text ""Und was bekam des Soldaten Weib?"") ('And what did the soldier's woman get?') for Ben Bagley's album "Kurt Weill Revisited, Vol. 2".

Burstyn served as president of the Actors' Equity Association from 1982 to 1985.

In 1997, Burstyn was inducted into the Michigan Women's Hall of Fame. In 2000, she was named co-president of the Actors Studio, alongside Al Pacino and Harvey Keitel.

She is a longtime supporter of the Democratic Party and appears in the documentary "PoliWood". 
She attended several political events of the 2008 election campaign as a supporter of Barack Obama, commenting sadly at one point how civil competition between Democrats and Republicans no longer exists.

Burstyn is on the Board of Selectors of Jefferson Awards for Public Service.

In 1950, she married Bill Alexander. They divorced in 1957. The following year, she married Paul Roberts, with whom she adopted a son named Jefferson in 1961. The couple divorced that same year.

In 1964, she married fellow actor Neil Nephew, who later changed his name to Neil Burstyn. The union was turbulent. Neil Burstyn was schizophrenic. He would have episodes of violence, and eventually left her. He attempted to reconcile, but she rejected this, ultimately divorcing him in 1972. In her autobiography, "Lessons in Becoming Myself", Burstyn revealed that he stalked her for a period of six years after their divorce, and that he eventually broke into her house and raped her. No charges were filed, as spousal rape was not yet legally a crime. He died by suicide in 1978.

Burstyn was raised Catholic, but now affiliates herself with all religious faiths. Her spiritual journey began with Sufism, a mystical form of Islam. She explains: "I am a spirit opening to the truth that lives in all of these religions... I always pray to Spirit, but sometimes it's to the Goddess. Sometimes it's to Jesus... Sometimes I pray to Ganesha if I need an obstacle removed. Guan Yin is one of my favorite manifestations of the divine, the embodiment of compassion... So I have Guan Yin with me all the time." Burstyn has stated that in her late 30s she began to delve into the spiritual realm, coming under the tutelage of Sufi teacher Pir Vilayat Inayat Khan; he gave her the spiritual name Hidaya, which means "she who guides" in Arabic.




</doc>
<doc id="92289" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=92289" title="Hilary Swank">
Hilary Swank

Hilary Ann Swank (born July 30, 1974) is an American actress and producer. She has won two Academy Awards for Best Actress.

Swank made her film debut in a minor role in "Buffy the Vampire Slayer", before making her breakout role in the fourth installment of "The Karate Kid" franchise, "The Next Karate Kid" in 1994. On television, she was part of the main cast in the eighth season of the drama series "Beverly Hills 90210" as single mother Carly Reynolds from 1997 to 1998. Swank garnered critical acclaim for her portrayal of Brandon Teena in the 1999 biographical film "Boys Don't Cry", which earned her the Academy Award for Best Actress and the Golden Globe Award for Best Actress in a Motion Picture – Drama. She starred in Clint Eastwood's 2004 sports drama film "Million Dollar Baby" as struggling-waitress-turned-boxer Maggie Fitzgerald, which won her a second Academy Award and Golden Globe Award for Best Actress.

She has also starred in films such as "The Gift" (2000), "Insomnia" (2002), "The Core" (2003), "Iron Jawed Angels" (2004), "Red Dust" (2004), "The Reaping" (2007), "P.S. I Love You" (2007), "Freedom Writers" (2007), and "The Homesman" (2014).

Swank was born in Lincoln, Nebraska. Her mother, Judy Kay (née Clough), was a secretary and dancer, and her father, Stephen Michael Swank, was a Chief Master Sergeant in the Oregon Air National Guard and later a traveling salesman. She has a brother Daniel, who is eight years her senior. Many of Swank's family members are from Ringgold County, Iowa. Her maternal grandmother, Frances Martha Clough (née Dominguez), was born in El Centro, California, of Mexican descent. Swank's paternal grandmother was born in England; her ancestry also includes German, other English, Swiss-German, Scottish, Scots-Irish, Welsh, and Dutch. The surname "Swank", originally "Schwenk", is of German origin.

After living in Spokane, Washington, Swank's family moved to a trailer park near Lake Samish in Bellingham, Washington, when Swank was six. She attended Happy Valley Elementary School, Fairhaven Middle School, then Sehome High School in Bellingham until she was 16. She also competed in the Junior Olympics and the Washington state championships in swimming, and she ranked fifth in the state in all-around gymnastics. Swank made her first appearance on stage when she was nine years old, starring in "The Jungle Book".

When she was 15, her parents separated, and her mother, supportive of her daughter's desire to act, moved with her to Los Angeles, where they lived out of their car until Swank's mother saved enough money to rent an apartment. Swank has called her mother the inspiration for her acting career and her life. In California, Swank enrolled in South Pasadena High School, later dropping out because of her ADHD and lack of interest. She described her time at South Pasadena High School, "I felt like such an outsider. I didn't feel like I fit in. I didn't belong in any way. I didn't even feel like the teachers wanted me there. I just felt like I wasn't seen or understood." She explained that she became an actor because she felt like an outsider, "As a kid I felt that I belonged only when I read a book or saw a movie, and could get involved with a character. It was natural that I became an actor because I longed so much to be those other people, or at least to play them."

Swank made her film debut in the 1992 comedy horror "Buffy the Vampire Slayer", playing a small role, after which she acted in the direct-to-video drama "Quiet Days in Hollywood", where she co-starred with Chad Lowe, who would become her husband for a time. Her first leading film role was in the fourth installment of the "Karate Kid" series, "The Next Karate Kid" (1994), which utilized her gymnastics background and paired her with Pat Morita. In 1995, she appeared with British actor Bruce Payne in "Kounterfeit". In 1994, she also starred in the drama "" as the abused step-daughter who was protected by Donna (Jaclyn Smith). In September 1997, Swank played single mother Carly Reynolds in "Beverly Hills, 90210" and was initially promised it would be a two-year role, but saw her character written out after 16 episodes in January 1998. Swank later stated that she was devastated at being cut from the show, thinking, "If I'm not good enough for "90210", I'm not good enough for anything."

The firing from "Beverly Hills, 90210" freed her to audition for the role of Brandon Teena in "Boys Don't Cry". To prepare for the role, Swank lived as a man for a month and reduced her body fat to seven percent. Many critics hailed her work as the best female performance of 1999 and her work ultimately won her the Golden Globe Award and Academy Award for Best Actress. Swank had earned only $75 per day for her work on the film, culminating in a total of $3,000. Her earnings were so low that she had not even earned enough to qualify for health insurance.

Swank again won the Academy Award and Golden Globe Award for Best Actress for playing a female boxer in Clint Eastwood's 2004 film "Million Dollar Baby", a role for which she underwent extensive training in the ring and weight room gaining 19 pounds of muscle, aided by professional trainer Grant L. Roberts. With her second Oscar, she had joined the ranks of Vivien Leigh and Luise Rainer as the only actresses to have been nominated for Academy Awards twice and won both times. After winning her second Oscar, she said, "I don't know what I did in this life to deserve this. I'm just a girl from a trailer park who had a dream."

In 2006, Swank signed a three-year contract with Guerlain to be the face of the women's fragrance "Insolence". She received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame in the motion picture category on January 8, 2007, and was the 2,325th star presented.

In 2007, Swank starred in "Freedom Writers", about a real-life teacher, Erin Gruwell. Many reviews of her performance were positive, with one critic noting that she "brings credibility" to the role, and another stating that her performance reaches a "singular lack of artifice, stripping herself back to the bare essentials". Swank next starred in the horror film "The Reaping" (2007), as a debunker of religious phenomena. Swank convinced the producers to move the film's setting from New England to the Deep South, and the film was filmed in Baton Rouge, Louisiana when Hurricane Katrina struck. The same year, she also appeared in the romantic drama "P.S. I Love You" with Gerard Butler. Swank portrayed the pioneering aviator Amelia Earhart in the 2009 biopic "Amelia", which she also co-executive produced through 2S Films, a production company she established with producer Molly Smith.

In 2012, Swank's audiobook recording of Caroline Knapp's "Pack of Two: The Intricate Bond Between People and Dogs" was released at Audible.com. In 2013, she starred in the television film "Mary and Martha" alongside Brenda Blethyn. In 2014, Swank played the lead role of Kate Parker, a woman whose life is shattered when she develops the degenerative disease ALS, in "You're Not You". The film co-starred Emmy Rossum and Josh Duhamel.

In 2017, she appeared in Steven Soderbergh's heist comedy "Logan Lucky" as Special Agent Sarah Grayson, alongside Channing Tatum and Daniel Craig, and portrayed lawyer Colette Hughes in Bille August's drama film "55 Steps". Swank will star in and executive produce the Alzheimer's disease drama film "What They Had", directed by Elizabeth Chomko. She has been cast in two upcoming television projects; she will portray Gail Getty in the first season of FX's anthology series "Trust", and will star as Laura Murphy in Alejandro González Iñárritu's drama series "The One Percent".

While filming "Quiet Days in Hollywood", Swank met actor Chad Lowe. They married on September 28, 1997. They announced their intention to divorce on January 9, 2006, which was finalized on November 1, 2007. In 2007, Swank began dating her agent, John Campisi, but they ended their relationship in May 2012.

On March 22, 2016, Swank announced her engagement to Ruben Torres, a financial advisor with UBS and former professional tennis player. The two had been dating since May 2015. In June 2016, Swank's representative confirmed she and Torres had ended their engagement.

In October 2011, Swank attracted controversy for attending an event in Chechnya's capital Grozny on the 35th birthday of Chechen president Ramzan Kadyrov on October 5. After wishing him "Happy birthday, Mr. President", she reportedly claimed knowledge about Kadyrov saying, "I read. I do my research." Following criticism from human rights groups, that reported having informed her about the human rights abuses in Chechnya prior to the event and asked her to reconsider her participation, Swank said she was unaware that Kadyrov had been accused of human rights violations and that she "deeply regrets" taking part in the lavish concert. She donated her personal appearance fees "to various charitable organizations".



</doc>
<doc id="23245556" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23245556" title="Academy Award for Best Actress">
Academy Award for Best Actress

The Academy Award for Best Actress is an award presented annually by the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences (AMPAS). It is given in honor of an actress who has delivered an outstanding performance in a leading role while working within the film industry.

The 1st Academy Awards ceremony was held in 1929 with Janet Gaynor receiving the award for her roles in "7th Heaven", "Street Angel", and "". Currently, nominees are determined by single transferable vote within the actors branch of AMPAS; winners are selected by a plurality vote from the entire eligible voting members of the Academy.

In the first three years of the awards, actresses were nominated as the best in their categories. At that time, all of their work during the qualifying period (as many as three films, in some cases) was listed after the award. However, during the 3rd ceremony held in 1930, only one of those films was cited in each winner's final award, even though each of the acting winners had two films following their names on the ballots.

The following year, this unwieldy and confusing system was replaced by the current system in which an actress is nominated for a specific performance in a single film. Starting with the 9th ceremony held in 1937, the category was officially limited to five nominations per year. One actress has been nominated posthumously, Jeanne Eagels. Only three film characters have been nominated more than once in this category: Elizabeth I of England (two times by Cate Blanchett), Leslie Crosbie in "The Letter", and Esther Blodgett in "A Star Is Born". Six women on the list have received an Honorary Academy Award for their acting; they are Greta Garbo, Barbara Stanwyck, Mary Pickford, Deborah Kerr, Gena Rowlands, and Sophia Loren.

Since its inception, the award has been given to 75 actresses. Katharine Hepburn has won the most awards in this category, with four Oscars. Meryl Streep, who has a total of 21 Oscar nominations (three wins), has been nominated in this category on 17 occasions, resulting in two awards. As of the 2017 ceremony, Emma Stone is the most recent winner in this category for her role as Mia Dolan in "La La Land".

In the following table, the years are listed as per Academy convention, and generally correspond to the year of film release in Los Angeles County; the ceremonies are always held the following year. For the first five ceremonies, the eligibility period spanned twelve months from August 1 to July 31. For the 6th ceremony held in 1934, the eligibility period lasted from August 1, 1932, to December 31, 1933. Since the 7th ceremony held in 1935, the period of eligibility became the full previous calendar year from January 1 to December 31.

The following individuals received two or more Best Actress awards:

The following individuals received four or more Best Actress nominations:





</doc>
<doc id="4233309" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4233309" title="List of Academy Award Best Actress winners by age">
List of Academy Award Best Actress winners by age

This is a list of winners of the Academy Award for Performance by an Actress in a Leading Role, presented annually by the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences (AMPAS) to an actress who has delivered an outstanding performance while working within the film industry. More popularly known as the Academy Award (or the Oscar) for Best Actress, this award was initially presented at the 1st Academy Awards ceremony for 1927–1928 and was most recently presented at the 88th Academy Awards ceremony for 2015. Throughout the past 89 years, accounting for ties and repeat winners, AMPAS has presented a total of 90 Best Actress awards to 75 different actresses. This list is current as of the 89th Academy Awards ceremony held on February 26, 2017.




</doc>
<doc id="21504" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21504" title="Nicole Kidman">
Nicole Kidman

Nicole Mary Kidman, (born 20 June 1967) is an Australian actress, producer, and occasional singer. She is the recipient of multiple awards in acting, including an Academy Award, one Primetime Emmy Award, four Golden Globe Awards, and the Silver Bear for Best Actress.

Kidman began her acting career in Australia with the 1983 film "Bush Christmas". She was a lead in "BMX" "Bandits" also in 1983. Her breakthrough came in 1989 with the thriller "Dead Calm" and the television miniseries "Bangkok Hilton". In 1990, she made her Hollywood debut in the racing film "Days of Thunder", opposite Tom Cruise. She went on to achieve wide recognition with leading roles in the romantic drama "Far and Away" (1992), the superhero film "Batman Forever" (1995), the crime comedy-drama "To Die For" (1995), for which she won a Golden Globe Award, and the erotic thriller "Eyes Wide Shut" (1999). She received two consecutive Academy Award for Best Actress nominations for playing a courtesan in the musical "Moulin Rouge!" (2001) and the writer Virginia Woolf in the drama film "The Hours" (2002); she won the award for the latter, and received Golden Globes for both films.

Kidman continued to star in commercially successful films, including the horror-thriller "The Others" (2001) and the epic war drama film "Cold Mountain" (2003), as she achieved critical acclaim for roles in independent films, including the dramas "Dogville" (2003), "Birth" (2004), "Rabbit Hole" (2010), for which she received a third Best Actress Oscar nomination, and the thriller "The Paperboy" (2012). Following a period of critical and commercial failures, Kidman earned a fourth Oscar nomination for playing a troubled mother in the biopic "Lion" (2016). She returned to television in 2017 with an acclaimed performance as a victim of domestic abuse in the HBO series "Big Little Lies", for which she won a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actress.

Kidman has been a Goodwill ambassador for UNICEF since 1994 and for UNIFEM since 2006. In 2006, Kidman was made a Companion in the Order of Australia and was the highest-paid actress in the motion picture industry for that year. As a result of being born to Australian parents in Hawaii, Kidman has dual citizenship in Australia and the United States. Kidman founded and owns the production company Blossom Films. Following her divorce from actor Tom Cruise, Kidman has been married to singer Keith Urban since 2006.

Kidman was born 20 June 1967 in Honolulu, Hawaii, while her Australian parents were temporarily in the United States on student visas. Her father was Antony Kidman (1938–2014), a biochemist, clinical psychologist and author, who died of a heart attack in Singapore aged 75. Her mother, Janelle Ann (née Glenny), is a nursing instructor who edited her husband's books and was a member of the Women's Electoral Lobby. Kidman's ancestry includes Irish, Scottish and English heritage.

Being born in Hawaii, she was given the Hawaiian name "Hōkūlani". The inspiration for the name came from a baby elephant born around the same time at the Honolulu Zoo, but the name is also a commonly used Hawaiian name for girls, Hokulani meaning 'Heavenly Star'.

At the time of Kidman's birth, her father was a graduate student at the University of Hawaiʻi at Mānoa. He became a visiting fellow at the National Institute of Mental Health of the United States. Opposed to the war in Vietnam, Kidman's parents participated in anti-war protests while living in Washington, D.C. The family returned to Australia when Kidman was four and her mother now lives on Sydney's North Shore. Kidman has a younger sister, Antonia Kidman, a journalist and TV presenter.

Kidman attended Lane Cove Public School and North Sydney Girls' High School. She was enrolled in ballet at three and showed her natural talent for acting in her primary and high school years.<ref name="Yahoo/"></ref> She says that she was first inspired to become an actress upon seeing Margaret Hamilton's performance as the Wicked Witch of the West in "The Wizard of Oz". Kidman has revealed that she was timid as a child, saying, "I am very shy – really shy – I even had a stutter as a kid, which I slowly got over, but I still regress into that shyness. So I don't like walking into a crowded restaurant by myself; I don't like going to a party by myself."

She initially studied at the Phillip Street Theatre in Sydney. At Philip Street, Kidman studied alongside Naomi Watts who had attended the same high school. She also attended the Australian Theatre for Young People. Here she took up drama, mime and performing in her teens, finding acting to be a refuge. Owing to her fair skin and naturally red hair, the Australian sun forced the young Kidman to rehearse in halls of the theatre. A regular at the Phillip Street Theatre, she received both encouragement and praise to pursue acting full-time.

In 1983, aged 16, Kidman made her film debut in a remake of the Australian holiday season favourite "Bush Christmas". By the end of 1983, she had a supporting role in the television series "Five Mile Creek". In 1984, her mother was diagnosed with breast cancer, which caused Kidman to halt her acting work temporarily while she studied massage so she could help her mother with physical therapy. She began gaining popularity in the mid-1980s after appearing in several film roles, including "BMX Bandits" (1983), "Watch the Shadows Dance" (1987 aka "Nightmaster"), and the romantic comedy "Windrider" (1986), which earned Kidman attention due to her racy scenes. Also during the decade, she appeared in several Australian productions, including the soap opera "A Country Practice" and the miniseries "Vietnam" (1986). She also made guest appearances on Australian television programs and TV movies.

In 1988, Kidman appeared in "Emerald City", based on the play of the same name. The Australian film earned her an Australian Film Institute for Best Supporting Actress. Kidman next starred with Sam Neill in "Dead Calm" (1989) as Rae Ingram, playing the wife of a naval officer. The thriller brought Kidman to international recognition; "Variety" commented: "Throughout the film, Kidman is excellent. She gives the character of Rae real tenacity and energy." Meanwhile, critic Roger Ebert noted the excellent chemistry between the leads, stating, "Kidman and Zane do generate real, palpable hatred in their scenes together." She followed that up with the Australian miniseries "Bangkok Hilton". She next moved on to star alongside her then-boyfriend and future husband, Tom Cruise, in the 1990 auto racing film "Days of Thunder", as a young doctor who falls in love with a NASCAR driver. It is Kidman's American debut and was among the highest-grossing films of the year.

In 1991, she co-starred with Thandie Newton and former classmate Naomi Watts in the Australian independent film "Flirting". They portrayed high school girls in this coming of age story, which won the Australian Film Institute Award for Best Film. That same year, her work in the film "Billy Bathgate" earned Kidman her first Golden Globe Award nomination, for Best Supporting Actress. "The New York Times", in its film review, called her "a beauty with, it seems, a sense of humor". The following year, she and Cruise re-teamed for Ron Howard's Irish epic "Far and Away" (1992), which was a modest critical and commercial success. In 1993, she starred in the thriller "Malice" opposite Alec Baldwin and the drama "My Life" opposite Michael Keaton.

In 1995, Kidman appeared in her highest-grossing live-action film (as of ), playing Dr. Chase Meridian, the damsel in distress, in the superhero film "Batman Forever", opposite Val Kilmer as the film's title character. The same year Kidman starred in Gus Van Sant's critically acclaimed dark comedy "To Die For", in which she played the murderous newcaster Suzanne Stone. Of Kidman's Golden Globe award-winning performance, Mick LaSalle of the "San Francisco Chronicle" said "[she] brings to the role layers of meaning, intention and impulse. Telling her story in close-up – as she does throughout the film – Kidman lets you see the calculation, the wheels turning, the transparent efforts to charm that succeed in charming all the same." Kidman next appeared in "The Portrait of a Lady" (1996), based on the novel of the same name, alongside Barbara Hershey, John Malkovich, and Mary-Louise Parker. The following year, she starred in the action-thriller "The Peacemaker" (1997) as White House nuclear expert Dr. Julia Kelly, opposite George Clooney. The film grossed $110,000,000 worldwide. In 1998, she co-starred with Sandra Bullock in the poorly received fantasy "Practical Magic" as a modern-day witch. Kidman returned to her work on stage the same year in the David Hare play "The Blue Room", which opened in London.
In 1999, Kidman reunited with then husband, Tom Cruise, to portray a married couple in "Eyes Wide Shut", the final film of director Stanley Kubrick. The film was subject to censorship controversies due to the explicit nature of its sex scenes. The film received further attention following Kubrick's death shortly before its release. After brief hiatus and a highly publicized divorce from Cruise, Kidman returned to the screen to play a mail-order bride in the British-American drama "Birthday Girl". In 2001, Kidman played the cabaret actress and courtesan Satine in Baz Luhrmann's musical "Moulin Rouge!", opposite Ewan McGregor. Her performance and her singing received positive reviews; Paul Clinton of "CNN.com" called it her best work since "To Die For", and wrote "[she] is smoldering and stunning as Satine. She moves with total confidence throughout the film [...] Kidman seems to specialize in "ice queen" characters, but with Satine she allows herself to thaw, just a bit." Subsequently, Kidman received her second Golden Globe Award, for Best Actress in a Motion Picture Musical or Comedy, as well as many other acting awards and nominations. She also received her first Academy Award nomination, for Best Actress.

Also in 2001, she had a starring role in Alejandro Amenábar's horror film "The Others" as Grace Stewart, a mother living in the Channel Islands during World War II who suspects her house is haunted. Grossing over $210,947,037 worldwide, the film also earned several Goya Awards award nominations, including a Best Actress nomination for Kidman. She received her second BAFTA and fifth Golden Globe nominations. Roger Ebert commented that "Alejandro Amenábar has the patience to create a languorous, dreamy atmosphere, and Nicole Kidman succeeds in convincing us that she is a normal person in a disturbing situation and not just a standard-issue horror movie hysteric." Kidman was named the World's Most Beautiful Person by People magazine

In 2002, Kidman won critical praise for her portrayal of Virginia Woolf in Stephen Daldry's "The Hours", which stars Meryl Streep and Julianne Moore. Kidman famously wore prosthetics that were applied to her nose making her almost unrecognisable playing the author during her time in 1920s England, and her bouts with depression and mental illness while trying to write her novel, "Mrs. Dalloway". The film earned positive notices and several nominations, including for an Academy Award for Best Picture. "The New York Times" wrote that, "Ms. Kidman, in a performance of astounding bravery, evokes the savage inner war waged by a brilliant mind against a system of faulty wiring that transmits a searing, crazy static into her brain". Kidman won numerous critics' awards, including her first BAFTA, third Golden Globe, and the Academy Award for Best Actress. As the first Australian actress to win an Academy Award, Kidman made a teary acceptance speech about the importance of art, even during times of war, saying, "Why do you come to the Academy Awards when the world is in such turmoil? Because art is important. And because you believe in what you do and you want to honour that, and it is a tradition that needs to be upheld."

Following her Oscar win, Kidman appeared in three very different films in 2003. The first, a leading role in "Dogville", by Danish director Lars von Trier, was an experimental film set on a bare soundstage. Though the film divided critics in the United States, Kidman still earned praise for her performance. Peter Travers of "Rolling Stones" magazine stated "Kidman gives the most emotionally bruising performance of her career in Dogville, a movie that never met a cliche it didn't stomp on." The second was an adaptation of Philip Roth's novel "The Human Stain", opposite Anthony Hopkins. Her third film was Anthony Minghella's war drama "Cold Mountain". Kidman appeared opposite Jude Law and Renée Zellweger, playing Southerner Ada Monroe, who is in love with Law's character and separated by the Civil War. "TIME" magazine wrote, "Kidman takes strength from Ada's plight and grows steadily, literally luminous. Her sculptural pallor gives way to warm radiance in the firelight". The film garnered several award nominations and wins for its actors; Kidman received her sixth Golden Globe nomination at the 61st Golden Globe Awards for Best Actress.

In 2004 she appeared in the film "Birth", which received controversy over a scene in which Kidman shares a bath with her co-star, 10-year-old Cameron Bright. At a press conference at the Venice Film Festival, Kidman addressed the controversy saying, "It wasn't that I wanted to make a film where I kiss a 10-year-old boy. I wanted to make a film where you understand love". Kidman earned her seventh Golden Globe nomination, for Best Actress – Motion Picture Drama. That same year she appeared in the black comedy-science-fiction film "The Stepford Wives", a remake of the 1975 film of the same name. Kidman appeared in the lead role as Joanna Eberhart, a successful producer. The film, directed by Frank Oz, was critically panned and a commercial failure. The following year, Kidman appeared opposite Sean Penn in the Sydney Pollack thriller "The Interpreter", playing UN translator Silvia Broome. Also that year, she starred in "Bewitched", based on the 1960s TV sitcom of the same name, opposite Will Ferrell. Both Kidman and Ferrell earned that year's Razzie Award for "Worst Screen Couple". Neither film fared well in the United States, with box office sales falling well short of the production costs, but both films performed well internationally.

In conjunction with her success in the film industry, Kidman became the face of the "Chanel No. 5" perfume brand. She starred in a campaign of television and print ads with Rodrigo Santoro, directed by "Moulin Rouge!" director Baz Luhrmann, to promote the fragrance during the holiday seasons of 2004, 2005, 2006, and 2008. The three-minute commercial produced for "Chanel No. 5" made Kidman the record holder for the most money paid per minute to an actor after she reportedly earned US$12million for the three-minute advert. During this time, Kidman was also listed as the 45th Most Powerful Celebrity on the 2005 "Forbes" Celebrity 100 List. She made a reported US$14.5 million in 2004–2005. On "People" magazine's list of 2005's highest-paid actresses, Kidman was second behind Julia Roberts, with US$16–17 million per-film price tag. Nintendo in 2007 announced that Kidman would be the new face of Nintendo's advertising campaign for the Nintendo DS game More Brain Training in its European market.
Kidman portrayed photographer Diane Arbus in the biography "Fur" (2006), opposite Robert Downey, Jr.. Both Kidman and Downey Jr. received praise for their performances. She also lent her voice to the animated film "Happy Feet" (2006), which grossed over US$384 million worldwide. In 2007, she starred in the science-fiction movie "The Invasion" directed by Oliver Hirschbiegel, a remake of the 1956 "Invasion of the Body Snatchers" that proved a critical and commercial failure. She also played opposite Jennifer Jason Leigh and Jack Black in Noah Baumbach's comedy-drama "Margot at the Wedding", which earned Kidman a Satellite Award nomination for Best Actress – Musical or Comedy. She then starred in the fantasy-adventure, "The Golden Compass" (2007), playing the villainous Marisa Coulter.

In 2008, she reunited with "Moulin Rouge!" director Baz Luhrmann in the Australian period film "Australia", set in the remote Northern Territory during the Japanese attack on Darwin during World War II. Kidman played opposite Hugh Jackman as an Englishwoman feeling overwhelmed by the continent. The acting was praised and the movie was a box office success worldwide. Kidman was originally set to star in the post-World War II German drama, "The Reader", working with previous collaborators Sydney Pollack and Anthony Minghella, but due to her pregnancy prior to filming she had to back out. The role went to Kate Winslet, who ultimately won the Oscar for Best Actress, which Kidman presented to her during the 81st Academy Awards. Kidman appeared in the 2009 Rob Marshall musical "Nine", portraying the Federico Fellini-like character's muse, Claudia Jenssen. She was featured alongside fellow Oscar winners Daniel Day-Lewis, Judi Dench, Marion Cotillard, Penélope Cruz and Sophia Loren. Kidman, whose screen time was brief compared to the other actresses, performed the musical number "Unusual Way" alongside Day-Lewis. The film received several Golden Globe and Academy Award nominations, and earned Kidman a fourth Screen Actors Guild Award nomination, as part of the Outstanding Cast.

In 2010, she starred with Aaron Eckhart in the film adaptation of the Pulitzer Prize-winning play "Rabbit Hole", for which she vacated her role in the Woody Allen picture "You Will Meet a Tall Dark Stranger". Her work on "Rabbit Hole" earned her critical acclaim, and received nominations for the Academy Awards, Golden Globe Awards, and Screen Actors Guild Awards, Kidman also produced this film. She lent her voice to a promotional video that Australia used to support its bid to host the 2018 FIFA World Cup. "TV Guide" reported in 2008 that Kidman will star in "The Danish Girl", a film adaptation of the novel of the same name, playing Lili Elbe, the world's first postoperative transsexual. "Screen Daily" reported that shooting would begin in Germany in July 2011. However the project has been delayed following the exit of the director, Lasse Hallström and Kidman's co-star Rachel Weisz. In 2009, "Variety" said that she would produce and star in a film adaptation of the Chris Cleave novel "Little Bee", in association with BBC Films.

In June 2010, "TV Guide" announced that Kidman and Clive Owen will star in an HBO film about Ernest Hemingway and his relationship with Martha Gellhorn. entitled "Hemingway & Gellhorn". The film, directed by Philip Kaufman, began shooting in March 2011, with an air date scheduled for 2012. She also starred alongside Nicolas Cage in director Joel Schumacher's action-thriller "Trespass", with the stars playing a married couple taken hostage.
On 17 September 2010, ContactMusic. com said Kidman would return to Broadway to portray Alexandra Del Lago in David Cromer's revival of Tennessee Williams' "Sweet Bird of Youth", with Scott Rudin producing. On 30 August 2011, Cromer spoke to "The New York Times" and explained that the production would not meet its original fall 2011 revival date but that it remains an active project.

In June 2011, Kidman was cast in Lee Daniels' adaptation of the Pete Dexter novel, "The Paperboy"; she began filming on the thriller on 1 August 2011, and "The Paperboy" was released in 2012. In the film, she portrayed death row groupie Charlotte Bless, and performed sex scenes that she claims not to have remembered until seeing the finished film. "I was like okay, so that's what I did," she said. The film competed in the 2012 Cannes Film Festival, and Kidman's performance drew critical acclaim and among nominations for the SAG and the Saturn Award for Best Supporting Actress, gave Kidman her second Golden Globe nomination for Best Supporting Actress and her tenth nomination overall. In 2012, Kidman's audiobook recording of Virginia Woolf's "To the Lighthouse" was released at Audible.com. Kidman also co-starred in Park Chan-wook's "Stoker" (2013) to positive critical response and a Saturn Award nomination for Best Supporting Actress. In April 2013 she was selected as a member of the main competition jury at the 2013 Cannes Film Festival.
In 2014, Kidman starred in the biopic, "Grace of Monaco" in the title role that chronicles the 1962 crisis, in which Charles de Gaulle blockaded the tiny principality, angered by Monaco's status as a tax haven for wealthy French subjects and Kelly's contemplating a Hollywood return to star in Alfred Hitchcock's "Marnie". Opening out of competition at the 2014 Cannes Film Festival, the film received largely negative reviews. Kidman also starred in two films with Colin Firth, the first, the British-Australian historical drama, "The Railway Man" in which Kidman played officer's wife Patti Lomax received positive critical reviews. Katherine Monk of the Montreal Gazette said of Kidman's performance, "It's a truly masterful piece of acting that transcends Teplitzky's store-bought framing, but it's Kidman who delivers the biggest surprise: For the first time since her eyebrows turned into solid marble arches, the Australian Oscar winner is truly terrific". The second, the British thriller film "Before I Go To Sleep" drew positive critical response of Kidman's performance, as Christine Lucas, a car crash survivor with brain damage. Kidman also appeared in the family film "Paddington" (2014) as a villain.

On 23 January, she starred in the Australian-Irish drama-thriller "Strangerland," which opened at the 2015 Sundance Film Festival to a "rapturous" audience response to Kidman's performance. Kidman also co-starred in the Jason Bateman-directed "The Family Fang", produced by Kidman's production company, Blossom Films, which premiered at the 2015 Toronto International Film Festival. Other projects include the biographical drama "Queen of the Desert", with Kidman portraying the lead role of traveller, writer, archaeologist, explorer, cartographer and political officer Gertrude Bell and "Genius" alongside Colin Firth and Guy Pearce. Kidman played a lead role in the 2015 thriller "Secret in Their Eyes", directed by Billy Ray and co-starring Julia Roberts and Chiwetel Ejiofor. After more than 15 years, Kidman returned to the West End in the UK premiere of "Photograph 51" at the Noël Coward Theatre. She starred as British scientist Rosalind Franklin in the production from 5 September to 21 November 2015, directed by Michael Grandage. The play focuses on Franklin's role in the discovery of the structure of DNA. Kidman and the play earned "glowing reviews." Her return to the West End has been hailed a success, especially after having won an acting award for her role in "Photograph 51".

In 2016, Kidman's performance in "Lion" earned rave reviews, as well as nominations for the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress, her fourth nomination overall, the Critics Choice for Best Supporting Actress, the Screen Actors Guild for Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Supporting Role, the BAFTA Award for Best Actress in a Supporting Role, a win in the same category at the Hollywood Film Awards as well as her third Golden Globe nomination for Best Supporting Actress, and her eleventh nomination overall. Kidman portrayed Sue Brierly, the adoptive mother of Saroo, an Indian boy who was separated from his birth family, a role she felt connected to as she herself is the mother of adopted children. Richard Roeper of "The Chicago Sun-Times" felt that "Kidman gives a powerful and moving performance as Saroo’s adoptive mother, who loves her son with every molecule of her being but comes to understand his quest. It’s as good as anything she’s done in the last decade."

In 2017, Kidman returned to television in the seven-part miniseries adaptation of the Liane Moriarty bestseller "Big Little Lies", which premiered on HBO. She produced the miniseries along with her co-star, Reese Witherspoon, and the show's director, Jean-Marc Vallée. She plays Celeste Wright, a former lawyer and housewife, who is concealing her abusive relationship with her younger husband, played by Alexander Skarsgård. Kidman has garnered critical acclaim for her performance, with Matthew Jacobs of "The Huffington Post" stating that she "delivered a career-defining performance." Ann Hornaday of "The Washington Post" wrote that "Kidman belongs in the pantheon of great actresses." She has received a nomination from the Television Critics Association and won the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Limited Series or Movie for her performance, as well as winning the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Limited Series as a producer. She went on to win a Golden Globe and SAG Award for her role. 

She then played Martha Farnsworth, the headmistress of an all-girls school during the Civil War, in Sofia Coppola's drama "The Beguiled", an adaptation of the novel written by Thomas P. Cullinan, which premiered at the 2017 Cannes Film Festival, competing for the Palme d'Or. The film received positive reviews, as did Kidman's performance, with Katie Walsh of "Tribune News Service" noting "Nicole Kidman is particularly, unsurprisingly excellent in her performance as the steely Miss Martha. She is controlled and in control, unflappable. Her genteel manners and femininity coexist easily with her toughness." Kidman had two other films premiere at the festival, the science-fiction romantic comedy "How to Talk to Girls at Parties", reuniting her with director John Cameron Mitchell, and the psychological thriller "The Killing of a Sacred Deer", directed by Yorgos Lanthimos, which also competed for the Palme d'Or. Also in 2017, Kidman played a supporting role in the television series "".

Kidman is set to portray Queen Atlanna, the mother of the title character, in the Warner Bros. film "Aquaman". She will also star alongside Bryan Cranston and Kevin Hart in "The Upside", a re-make of the 2011 French comedy "The Intouchables". She is also set to star in the upcoming animated film, "The Guardian Brothers", alongside Meryl Streep, Mel Brooks, Edward Norton, and Dan Fogler.

Kidman has been married twice: previously to actor Tom Cruise, and currently to country singer Keith Urban. She has an adopted son and daughter with Cruise as well as two biological daughters with Urban. Kidman met Cruise in November 1989, while filming "Days of Thunder", they were married on Christmas Eve 1990 in Telluride, Colorado. The couple adopted a daughter, Isabella Jane (born 1992), and a son, Connor Anthony (born 1995). On 5 February 2001, the couple's spokesperson announced their separation. Cruise filed for divorce two days later, and the marriage was dissolved in August of that year, with Cruise citing irreconcilable differences. In a 2007 interview with "Marie Claire", Kidman noted the incorrect reporting of the ectopic pregnancy early in her marriage. "It was wrongly reported as miscarriage, by everyone who picked up the story." "So it's huge news, and it didn't happen."

In the June 2006 issue of "Ladies' Home Journal", she said she still loved Cruise: "He was huge; still is. To me, he was just Tom, but to everybody else, he is huge. But he was lovely to me and I loved him. I still love him." In addition, she has expressed shock about their divorce. In 2015, former Church of Scientology executive Mark Rathbun claimed in a documentary film that he was instructed to "facilitate [Cruise's] breakup with Nicole Kidman". Cruise's auditor further claimed Kidman had been wiretapped on Cruise's suggestion.

Prior to marrying Cruise, Kidman had been involved in relationships with Australian actor Marcus Graham and "Windrider" (1986) co-star Tom Burlinson. She was also said to be involved with Adrien Brody. The film "Cold Mountain" brought rumours that an affair between Kidman and co-star Jude Law was responsible for the break-up of his marriage. Both denied the allegations, and Kidman won an undisclosed sum from the British tabloids that published the story. She met musician Lenny Kravitz in 2003 and dated him into 2004. Robbie Williams confirmed he had a short romance with Kidman on her yacht in summer 2004.

In a 2007 "Vanity Fair" interview, Kidman revealed that she had been secretly engaged to someone prior to her present relationship to New Zealand-Australian country singer Keith Urban, whom she met at , an event honouring Australians, in January 2005. Kidman married Urban on 25 June 2006, at Cardinal Cerretti Memorial Chapel in the grounds of St Patrick's Estate, Manly in Sydney. In an interview in 2015, Kidman said, "We didn't really know each other – we got to know each other during our marriage." They maintain homes in Sydney, Sutton Forest (New South Wales, Australia), Los Angeles, and Nashville (Tennessee, USA). The couple's first daughter was born in 2008, in Nashville. In 2010, Kidman and Urban had their second daughter via surrogacy at Nashville's Centennial Women's Hospital.

In an on-stage interview by Tina Brown at the 2015 Women in the World (WITW) conference, Kidman stated that she turned her attention to her career after her divorce from Tom Cruise: "Out of my divorce came work that was applauded so that was an interesting thing for me", and led to her Academy Award in 2002.

Kidman is Catholic. She attended Mary Mackillop Chapel in North Sydney. Following criticism of "The Golden Compass" by Catholic leaders as anti-Catholic, Kidman told "Entertainment Weekly" that the Catholic Church is part of her "essence," and that her religious beliefs would prevent her from taking a role in a film she perceived was anti-Catholic. During her divorce from Tom Cruise, she stated that she did not want their children raised as Scientologists. She has been reluctant to discuss Scientology since her divorce. In 2014, Kidman said she had been practicing Transcendental Meditation since her early twenties. Kidman has donated to U.S. Democratic party candidates.

In 2002, Kidman first appeared on the Australian rich list published annually in the "Business Review Weekly" with an estimated net worth of A$122 million. In the 2011 published list, Kidman's wealth was estimated at A$304 million, down from A$329 million in 2010. Kidman has raised money for, and drawn attention to, disadvantaged children around the world. In 1994, she was appointed a goodwill ambassador for UNICEF, and in 2004, she was honoured as a "Citizen of the World" by the United Nations. Kidman joined the Little Tee Campaign for breast cancer care to design T-shirts or vests to raise money to fight the disease; motivated by her mother's own battle with breast cancer in 1984.

In the 2006 Australia Day Honours, Kidman was made a Companion of Order of Australia (AC) for "service to the performing arts as an acclaimed motion picture performer, to health care through contributions to improve medical treatment for women and children and advocacy for cancer research, to youth as a principal supporter of young performing artists, and to humanitarian causes in Australia and internationally." However, due to film commitments and her wedding to Urban, it wasn't until 13 April 2007 that she was presented with the honour. It was presented by the Governor-General of Australia, Major General Michael Jeffery, in a ceremony at Government House, Canberra. Kidman was appointed goodwill ambassador of the United Nations Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM) in 2006. In this capacity, Kidman has addressed international audiences at UN events, raised awareness through the media and testified before the United States House of Representatives Committee on Foreign Affairs to support the International Violence against Women Act. Kidman visited Kosovo in 2006 to learn about women's experiences of conflict and UNIFEM's support efforts. She is the international spokesperson for UNIFEM's Say NO – UNiTE to End Violence against Women initiative. Kidman and the UNIFEM executive director presented over five million signatures collected during the first phase of this to the UN Secretary-General on 25 November 2008.

In the beginning of 2009, Kidman appeared in a series of postage stamps featuring Australian actors. She, Geoffrey Rush, Russell Crowe, and Cate Blanchett each appear twice in the series: once as themselves and once as their Academy Award-nominated character, Kidman's second stamp showed her as Satine from Moulin Rouge!. On 8 January 2010, alongside Nancy Pelosi, Joan Chen and Joe Torre, Kidman attended the ceremony to help Family Violence Prevention Fund break ground on a new international center located in the Presidio of San Francisco.

In 2015, Kidman became the brand ambassador for Etihad Airways.

Kidman supports the Nashville Predators, being seen and photographed almost nightly throughout the season. Additionally, she supports Sydney Swans in the Australian Football League, and once served as a club ambassador.

As of 2017, Kidman's movies have grossed more than US$3.9 billion at the worldwide box-office according to Box Office Mojo.

Her discography consists of one spoken word album, one extended play, three singles, three music videos, ten other appearances, a number of unreleased tracks and two tribute songs recorded by various artists.
Kidman, primarily known in the field of acting, entered the music industry in the 2000s after recording a number of tracks for the soundtrack album to Baz Luhrmann's 2001 motion picture "Moulin Rouge!" that she starred. Her duet with Ewan McGregor entitled "Come What May" was released as her debut and the second single of the OST through Interscope on 24 September 2001. The composition became the eighth highest selling single by an Australian artist for that year, being certified Gold by Australian Recording Industry Association, while reaching on the UK Singles Chart at number twenty-seven. In addition to, the song received a nomination at the 59th Golden Globe Awards as the Best Original Song and has been listed as the eighty-fifth within AFI's 100 Years...100 Songs by American Film Institute.
"Somethin' Stupid", a cover version of Frank and Nancy Sinatra followed soon. The track recorded as her common duet with English singer-songwriter Robbie Williams was issued on 14 December 2001, by Chrysalis as the lead of his fourth studio album "Swing When You're Winning". Kidman's second single topped the official music charts in Italy, New Zealand, Portugal and England, as well as scored top ten placings all over Europe, including Australia, Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Germany, Netherlands, Norway and Switzerland. Apart from being certified either Gold or Silver in a number of countries, it was classified as the eleventh best-selling single of 2002 in Italy, thirtieth in the UK, the fifty-ninth in Australia, and the ninety-third in France, respectively.

On 5 April 2002, Kidman released through Interscope her third single, a cover of Randy Crawford's "One Day I'll Fly Away". A Tony Philips remix of the track was promoted as the pilot single of a follow-up to the original soundtrack of the same name, "Moulin Rouge! Vol. 2". After that, in 2006, she contributed with her vocal for the OST "Happy Feet" on a rendition of Prince' "Kiss". While in 2009, she was featured on the "Nine" soundtrack ("Unusual Way").

Most recently, her name has been credited on a track called "What's the Procedure", issued on 14 March 2013, on the compilation "I Know Why They Call It Pop: Volume 2" by Rok Lok Records. Among others, Kidman also narrated an audiobook in 2012.

Her collaboration with Ewan McGregor on "Come What May" peaked at No. 27 in the UK Singles Chart. Later she collaborated with Robbie Williams on "Somethin' Stupid", a cover version for Williams' swing covers album "Swing When You're Winning"; the song peaked at No. 8 in the Australian ARIAnet Singles Chart and at No. 1, for three weeks, in the UK.
In 2006, while voicing a role in the animated movie "Happy Feet", she provided vocals for Norma Jean's "heartsong", a slightly altered version of "Kiss" by Prince. Kidman sang in Rob Marshall's movie musical "Nine" (2009).

In 2017, she and Nicolle Gaylon sung backing vocals on her husband, country music singer Keith Urban’s song ’Female’.

In 2003, Kidman received a Star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame. In addition to her 2002 Academy Award for Best Actress, Kidman has received Best Actress awards from the following critics' groups or award-granting organisations: the Hollywood Foreign Press (Golden Globes), the Australian Film Institute, Blockbuster Entertainment Awards, Empire Awards, Golden Satellite Awards, Hollywood Film Festival, London Critics Circle, Russian Guild of Film Critics, and the Southeastern Film Critics Association. In 2003, Kidman was given the American Cinematheque Award. She also received recognition from the National Association of Theatre Owners at the ShoWest Convention in 1992 as the Female Star of Tomorrow and in 2002 for a Distinguished Decade of Achievement in Film.




</doc>
<doc id="93560" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=93560" title="Reese Witherspoon">
Reese Witherspoon

Laura Jeanne Reese Witherspoon (born March 22, 1976) is an American actress, producer, and entrepreneur. She is the recipient of several awards including an Academy Award, a Primetime Emmy Award, a BAFTA Award, and a Golden Globe Award. Born in New Orleans and raised in Tennessee, she began her career as a child actress, making her professional screen debut in "The Man in the Moon" (1991), for which she was nominated for a Young Artist Award. Following breakout roles in "" (1992) and "Jack the Bear" (1993), she starred in the comedy-drama "Pleasantville" (1998), for which she won the Young Hollywood Award for Breakthrough Performance. Her leading role of Tracy Flick in "Election" (1999) was nominated for a Golden Globe Award.

Witherspoon's breakthrough role was playing Elle Woods in the 2001 film "Legally Blonde", for which she received her second Golden Globe nomination. The following year, she starred in the romantic comedy "Sweet Home Alabama", which emerged as her biggest live-action commercial success. In 2005, she portrayed June Carter in "Walk the Line", which earned her the Academy Award, Golden Globe Award, BAFTA Award, Screen Actors Guild Award, and Critics Choice Award for Best Actress. Other notable films of hers include "" (2003), "Monsters vs. Aliens" (2009), "Water for Elephants" (2011), and "Sing" (2016). In 2014, Witherspoon produced the thriller "Gone Girl" and received critical acclaim for portraying Cheryl Strayed in "Wild", for which she earned her second Academy Award nomination for Best Actress and a fourth Golden Globe nomination. In 2017, she co-produced and starred in the HBO drama series "Big Little Lies", for which she received two Primetime Emmy Award nominations for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Miniseries or a Movie and Outstanding Limited Series, winning the latter as a producer.

Witherspoon owns a production company, Hello Sunshine, a clothing company Draper James, and she is actively involved in children's and women's advocacy organizations. She serves on the board of the Children's Defense Fund (CDF) and was named Global Ambassador of Avon Products in 2007, serving as honorary chair of the charitable Avon Foundation. She received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame in 2010.

Witherspoon was born on March 22, 1976 in Southern Baptist Hospital, New Orleans, Louisiana, while her father, Dr. John Draper Witherspoon, was a student at Tulane University medical school. Dr. Witherspoon was born in Georgia and served as a lieutenant colonel in the United States Army Reserve. He was in private practice as an otolaryngologist until 2012. Her mother, Mary Elizabeth "Betty" (née Reese), is from Harriman, Tennessee. Betty earned five degrees in total, including a Ph.D in pediatric nursing. She became a professor of nursing at Vanderbilt University. Her older brother, John Jr. is a real estate agent. Witherspoon has claimed descent from Scottish-born John Witherspoon, who signed the United States Declaration of Independence; however, this claim has not been verified by the Society of the Descendants of the Signers of the Declaration of Independence genealogists. She has said that a DNA test showed her to be of "63 percent" Irish descent. Her parents are still legally married, although they separated in 1996, due to what Reese's mother has described as Reese's father's alcoholism, infidelity, overspending, and hoarding.

Because Witherspoon's father worked for the U.S. military in Wiesbaden, Germany, she lived there for four years as a child. After returning to the U.S., she spent her childhood in Nashville, Tennessee. Witherspoon was raised as an Episcopalian, and has said she is proud of the "definitive Southern upbringing" which she received. She said that it gave her "a sense of family and tradition" and taught her about "being conscientious about people's feelings, being polite, being responsible and never taking for granted what you have in your life." At the age of seven, Witherspoon was selected as a model for a florist's television advertisements, which motivated her to take acting lessons. At age eleven, she took first place in the Ten-State Talent Fair. Witherspoon received high grades in school, loved reading, and considered herself "a big dork who read loads of books." On mentioning her love for books, she said, "I get crazy in a bookstore. It makes my heart beat hard because I want to buy everything." She has been described as a "multi-achiever" and was given the nickname "Little Type A" by her parents. Witherspoon attended middle school at Harding Academy and graduated from the all-girls' Harpeth Hall School in Nashville, during which time she was a cheerleader. She later attended Stanford University as an English literature major, but left the school prior to completing her studies to pursue an acting career.

In 1991, Witherspoon attended an open casting call for "The Man in the Moon", intending to audition as a bit player; she was instead cast for the lead role of Dani Trant, a 14-year-old country girl who falls in love for the first time with her 17-year-old neighbor. According to The Guardian, her performance made an early impression. On her performance, Roger Ebert commented, "Her first kiss is one of the most perfect little scenes I've ever seen in a movie." For this role, Witherspoon was nominated for the Young Artist Award Best Young Actress. Later that year, she made her television debut role in "Wildflower" with Patricia Arquette. In 1992, Witherspoon appeared in the TV movie "Desperate Choices: To Save My Child", portraying a critically ill young girl.

In 1993, she played a young wife in the CBS miniseries "Return to Lonesome Dove", Nonnie Parker in the Disney film "A Far Off Place" and had a minor role in "Jack the Bear", which garnered her the Young Artist Award for Best Youth Actress Co-star. The next year, Witherspoon had another leading role as Wendy Pfister in the 1994 film "S.F.W.", directed by Jefery Levy. In 1996, Witherspoon starred in two major films: the thriller "Fear" alongside Mark Wahlberg, as Nicole Walker, a teenage girl who starts dating a man with obsessive tendencies, and the black-comedy thriller "Freeway", alongside Kiefer Sutherland and Brooke Shields, where she held the lead role. Her character in Freeway, Vanessa Lutz, is a poor girl living in Los Angeles, who encounters a serial killer on the way to her grandmother's home in Stockton. The film received positive reviews from the press. Among them was the "San Francisco Chronicle", with Mick LaSalle commenting, "Witherspoon, who does a Texas accent, is dazzling, utterly believable in one extreme situation after the other." Witherspoon's performance won her the Best Actress Award at the Cognac Police Film Festival and helped establish her as a rising star. The making of the film also gave Witherspoon significant acting experience; as she said, "Once I overcame the hurdle of that movie – which scared me to death – I felt like I could try anything."

In 1998, Witherspoon had major roles in three movies: "Overnight Delivery", "Pleasantville" and "Twilight". In "Pleasantville", she starred with Tobey Maguire in a tale about 1990s teenage siblings who are magically transported into the setting of a 1950s television series. She portrayed Jennifer, the sister of Maguire's character who is mainly concerned about appearances, relationships and popularity. Her performance received good reviews and garnered her the Young Hollywood Award for Best Female Breakthrough Performance. Director Gary Ross applauded her efforts saying, "she commits to a character so completely and she understands comedy".

In 1999, Witherspoon starred alongside Alessandro Nivola in the drama thriller "Best Laid Plans"; she played Lissa, a woman who schemes with her lover Nick to escape a small dead-end town. Also that year co-starred with Sarah Michelle Gellar and Ryan Phillippe in the drama film "Cruel Intentions", a modern take on the 18th-century French novel "Les Liaisons Dangereuses". "The San Francisco Chronicle" praised her performance as Annette Hargrove: "Witherspoon is especially good in the least flashy role, and even when called upon to make a series of cute devilish faces, she pulls it off." She also appeared in a music video by Marcy Playground for the film's soundtrack. The film became a box office success and a cult classic.

Next came perhaps Ms. Witherspoon's career-defining role: starring with Matthew Broderick in "Election", based on Tom Perrotta's "novel"; for her portrayal of Tracy Flick, she received vast critical acclaim and won the Best Actress Award from the National Society of Film Critics and the Online Film Critics Society, a first Golden Globe nomination and an Independent Spirit Award nomination. Witherspoon also received a rank on the list of "100 Greatest Film Performances of All Time" by "Premiere". Director Alexander Payne said of her, "She's got that quality that men find attractive, while women would like to be her friend. But that's just the foundation. Nobody else is as funny or brings such charm to things. She can do anything."

In spite of her success with "Election", Witherspoon noted in an interview that she struggled to find work after completing the film due to typecasting. Analyzing the reasons behind her difficulty to find work, Witherspoon commented, "I think because the character I played was so extreme and sort of shrewish—people thought that was who I was, rather than me going in and creating a part. I would audition for things and I'd always be the second choice—studios never wanted to hire me and I wasn't losing the parts to big box office actresses but to ones who I guess people felt differently about." In 2000, Witherspoon played a supporting role in "American Psycho" and made a cameo appearance in "Little Nicky". She also guest starred in season six of "Friends" as Rachel Green's sister Jill.

The 2001 film "Legally Blonde" marked a turning point in Witherspoon's career; she starred as Elle Woods, a fashion-merchandising major who decides to become a law student in order to follow her ex-boyfriend to Harvard Law School. Witherspoon said about the role, "When I read "Legally Blonde", I was like, 'She's from Beverly Hills, she's rich, she's in a sorority. She has a great boyfriend. Oh yeah, she gets dumped. Who cares? I still hate her.' So we had to make sure she was the kind of person you just can't hate." "Legally Blonde" was a box-office hit, grossing US$96 million domestically. Witherspoon's performance earned her praise from critics as the press began referring to her as "the new Meg Ryan". Roger Ebert commented, "Witherspoon effortlessly animated this material with sunshine and quick wit", and Salon.com noted that "she [Witherspoon] delineates Elle's character beautifully". Meanwhile, the "Seattle Post-Intelligencer" concluded, "Witherspoon is a talented comedian who can perk up a scene just by marching in full of pep and drive and she powers this modest little comedy almost single-handedly." For her work, Witherspoon garnered her second Golden Globe Best Actress nomination and an MTV Movie Award for Best Comedic Performance.

In 2002, after the success of "Legally Blonde", Witherspoon starred in several roles, such as Greta Wolfcastle in "The Simpsons" episode "The Bart Wants What It Wants", and as Cecily in the comedy "The Importance of Being Earnest", a film adaptation of Oscar Wilde's play in which she received a Teen Choice Award nomination. Later that year, she starred with Josh Lucas and Patrick Dempsey in Andy Tennant's film "Sweet Home Alabama", where she played Melanie Carmichael, a young fashion designer who intends to marry a New York politician but must return to Alabama to divorce her childhood sweetheart, from whom she has been separated for seven years. Witherspoon regarded this as a "personal role" in that it reminded her of experiences she had when she moved from her hometown Nashville to Los Angeles. The movie became Witherspoon's biggest live-action box office hit, earning over $35 million in the opening weekend and grossing over $127 million in the U.S. Despite the commercial success, critics gave "Sweet Home Alabama" negative reviews. It was called "a romantic comedy so rote, dull and predictable" by "The Miami Herald", and the press widely agreed that Witherspoon was the only reason the movie attracted such a large audience. When describing Witherspoon's role in the movie, "The Christian Science Monitor" concluded, "She is not the movie's main attraction, she is its only attraction."

In 2003, Witherspoon followed up the success of "Legally Blonde" by starring in the sequel "". Elle Woods has become a Harvard-educated lawyer who is determined to protect animals from cosmetics-industry science tests. The sequel was not as financially successful as the first film and it generated mostly negative reviews. "USA Today" considered the movie "plodding, unfunny and almost cringe-worthy", but also noted that "Reese Witherspoon still does a fine job portraying the fair-haired lovable brainiac, but her top-notch comic timing is wasted on the humorless dialogue." Meanwhile, Salon.com concluded that the sequel "calcifies everything that was enjoyable about the first movie". Despite being panned by critics, the sequel took in over $39 million in its first five days in the U.S. box office charts and eventually grossed $90 million in the US. Witherspoon received a $15 million paycheck for the role—a starting point to make her consistently one of Hollywood's highest-paid actresses from 2002 until 2010.

In 2004, Witherspoon starred in "Vanity Fair", adapted from the 19th-century classic novel "Vanity Fair" and directed by Mira Nair. Her character, Becky Sharp, is a poor woman with a ruthless determination to find fortune and establish herself a position in society. Witherspoon was carefully costumed to conceal that during the filming she was pregnant with her second child. This pregnancy was not a hindrance to her work as Witherspoon believed the gestation had in fact helped her portrayal of Sharp's character: "I love the luminosity that pregnancy brings, I love the fleshiness, I love the ample bosom—it gave me much more to play with", she said. The film and Witherspoon's portrayal of Sharp received mixed reviews, as "The Hollywood Reporter" wrote, "Nair's cast is splendid. Witherspoon does justice to the juicy role by giving the part more buoyancy than naughtiness." At the same time, "The Charlotte Observer" called her work "an excellent performance that's soft around the edges" and the "Los Angeles Times" concluded that Becky is "a role Reese Witherspoon was born to play". However, "LA Weekly" wrote "[Witherspoon] ends up conveying so little of what’s at once appalling and perversely attractive about the would-be mistress of Vanity Fair" and states that it may have to do with Witherspoon's vanity, "with an Oscar-less young star’s need to be loved more than anyone could conceivably love the “real” Becky Sharp.". Others have stated she was miscast.

In late 2004, Witherspoon began working alongside Mark Ruffalo on the romantic comedy "Just Like Heaven". Her character, Elizabeth Masterson, is an ambitious young doctor who gets into a car accident on her way to a blind date and is left in a coma; her spirit returns to her old apartment where she later finds true love.
Earlier that year Witherspoon was chosen to portray June Carter Cash, the second wife of country music singer-songwriter Johnny Cash (Joaquin Phoenix), in "Walk the Line". She never had the chance to meet Carter Cash, as Witherspoon was filming "Vanity Fair" at the time Carter Cash died. Witherspoon performed her own vocals in the film and her songs had to be performed in front of a live audience, she was so worried about needing to perform live that she asked her lawyer to terminate the film contract. "That was the most challenging part of the role," she later recalled in an interview, "I'd never sung professionally." Subsequently, she had to spend six months learning how to sing for the role. Witherspoon's portrayal of Carter Cash was well received by critics, and Roger Ebert wrote that her performance added "boundless energy" to the movie. She won several awards for her performance, including the Golden Globe Award, the Screen Actors Guild, the BAFTA and the Academy Award for Best Actress in a Lead Role. Besides critical success in the movie industry, Witherspoon and Phoenix received a nomination for "collaborative video of the year" from the CMT Music Awards. Witherspoon expressed her passion for the movie: "I really like in this film that it is realistic and portrays sort of a real marriage, a real relationship where there are forbidden thoughts and fallibility. And it is about compassion in the long haul, not just the short easy solutions to problems." She also stated that she believed Carter Cash was a woman ahead of her time: "I think the really remarkable thing about her character is that she did all of these things that we sort of see as normal things in the 1950s when it wasn't really acceptable for a woman to be married and divorced twice and have two different children by two different husbands and travel around in a car full of very famous musicians all by herself. She didn't try to comply to social convention, so I think that makes her a very modern woman."

Witherspoon's first post-Oscar role came in the modern-day fairy tale "Penelope", as Annie, the best friend of Penelope (Christina Ricci), a girl who has a curse in her family. The film was produced by her company Type A Films, with filming commencing in March 2006, immediately following Witherspoon's Oscar win for "Walk the Line". Although the movie premiered at the 2006 Toronto International Film Festival, the final release date of "Penelope" was delayed twice before an eventual February 2008 release.

Following her critical success with "Walk the Line", Witherspoon admits to spending several years "kind of floundering career-wise". Reflecting on this period of time in a December 2014 interview, Witherspoon attributed it to her separation from her first husband in October 2006 and their subsequent divorce, stating that she spent "a few years just trying to feel better. You know, you can't really be very creative when you feel like your brain is scrambled eggs." She claims that she "wasn't making things I was passionate about. I was just kind of working, you know. And it was really clear that audiences weren't responding to anything I was putting out there."

This period of Witherspoon's career began with the filming of the abduction thriller "Rendition" in November 2006. In the film, she plays Isabella El-Ibrahim, the pregnant wife of a bombing suspect. The film was released in October 2007 and marked Witherspoon's first appearance in theaters since the 2005 release of "Walk the Line". The movie received mostly mixed reviews and was generally considered a disappointment at the Toronto International Film Festival. Witherspoon's performance was also criticized: "Reese Witherspoon is surprisingly lifeless", "USA Today" wrote, "She customarily injects energy and spirit into her parts, but here, her performance feels tamped down."
In December 2007, Witherspoon began working with Vince Vaughn, filming the holiday comedy "Four Christmases", a story about a couple who must spend their Christmas Day trying to visit all four of their divorced parents. The film was released in November 2008. Despite being panned by critics, the movie became a box-office success, earning more than $120 million domestically and $157 million worldwide. In 2009, Witherspoon voiced Susan Murphy, lead character in DreamWorks' computer-animated film "Monsters vs. Aliens", released in March 2009, becoming her biggest hit at the time. She also co-produced the "Legally Blonde" spin-off "Legally Blondes" starring Milly and Becky Rosso.

However, Witherspoon did not appear in a live-action film for two years after the 2008 release of "Four Christmases". She told "Entertainment Weekly" that the "break" was unplanned, stating that, "I just didn't read anything I liked... There are a lot of really, really, really big movies about robots and things—and there's not a part for a 34-year-old woman in a robot movie." Witherspoon returned with three films released in 2010, 2011 and 2012, all centered on her as a woman caught in a love triangle between two men. In a 2012 interview with MTV, Witherspoon jokingly referred to this trio of films as her "love triangle period".

The first film was James L. Brooks' romantic comedy "How Do You Know" which starred Witherspoon as a former national softball player who struggles to choose between a baseball-star boyfriend (Owen Wilson) and a business executive being investigated for white-collar crime (Paul Rudd). The movie was filmed in Philadelphia and Washington, D.C. during the summer and fall of 2009 and released on December 17, 2010. The movie was both a critical and box office failure. Despite a budget of more than $100 million the film earned only $7.6 million in its opening weekend, leading the "Los Angeles Times" to call it "one of the year's biggest flops". The movie earned mainly negative reviews from critics, scoring 35% on Rotten Tomatoes with 111 reviews as of late December 2010.

Witherspoon's second love-triangle movie was the film adaptation of the 1930s circus drama "Water for Elephants". She began circus training in March 2010 for her role as Marlena, a glamorous performer stuck in a marriage to a volatile husband (Christoph Waltz) but intrigued by the circus's new veterinarian (Robert Pattinson). The movie was filmed between late May and early August 2010 in various locations in Tennessee, Georgia, and California. It was released on April 22, 2011 and received mixed critical reviews.

In September 2010, Witherspoon began principal photography in Vancouver for the third and final love-triangle film, "This Means War", a 20th Century Fox spy comedy directed by McG in which Witherspoon's character is at the center of a battle between best friends (played by Chris Pine and Tom Hardy) who are both in love with her. The film had a "sneak-peek" release on Valentine's Day, before fully opening on February 17, 2012. The film was panned by critics (with a 25% Rotten Tomatoes rating), and fared poorly at the box office, taking fifth place on its opening weekend with sales of $17.6 million. "The New York Times" remarked that this "extended the box office cold streak for the Oscar-winning Ms. Witherspoon."

Witherspoon's subsequent films signaled a departure from the love-triangle theme. In September 2011, a year after beginning work on "This Means War", she filmed a small role in Jeff Nichols's coming-of-age drama "Mud" in Arkansas, playing Juniper, the former girlfriend of a fugitive (Matthew McConaughey), who enlists two local boys to help him evade capture and rekindle his romance with her. "Mud" premiered in May 2012 in competition for the Palme d'Or at the Cannes Film Festival, but did not win. Following its American debut at the Sundance Film Festival on January 19, 2013, the film had a limited release in select North American theaters on April 26, 2013.

Witherspoon next starred in "Devil's Knot", which is based on Atom Egoyan's true crime book of the same name and examines the controversial case of the West Memphis Three. Like "Mud", the film is set in Arkansas. Witherspoon played Pam Hobbs, the mother of one of three young murder victims. In an interview subsequent to her casting in the film, Egoyan noted that although the role requires "an emotionally loaded journey", he "met with Reese, and... talked at length about the project, and she's eager to take on the challenge". The movie was shot in Georgia in June and July 2012. Witherspoon was pregnant with her third child during filming. The film's world premiere was held on September 8, 2013 at the Toronto International Film Festival. It was then released in selected American theaters on May 9, 2014.

In April 2013, Witherspoon began production in Atlanta on Canadian director Philippe Falardeau's film "The Good Lie". It is based on real-life events, about a brash American woman assigned to help four young Sudanese refugees (known as Lost Boys of Sudan) who win a lottery for relocation to the U.S. It was released on October 3, 2014.

Witherspoon shot a small role in "Inherent Vice" (2014), an adaptation of Thomas Pynchon's novel, in Pasadena, California in summer 2013.In 2012 she, by herself, started the production company Pacific Standard. The goal of the company was to produce movies with strong female lead roles. In a speech she gave at the Glamour Awards in 2015, she said that she was tired of seeing only movies with a strictly male focus being produced. The mission of the production company is to focus more on stories about the trials and tribulations of women. So far they have produced movies like Gone Girl and Wild.Through her company Pacific Standard, Witherspoon served as a producer in the film adaptation of Gillian Flynn's novel "Gone Girl", though she did not star. Indeed, Witherspoon and her producing partner "had little to do with the production of "Gone Girl"", leaving it to director David Fincher while focusing their efforts on another adaptation produced via Pacific Standard, that of Cheryl Strayed's memoir "", which began production in fall 2013 on the same day as "Gone Girl". Witherspoon starred in the project, portraying Strayed herself on her hike along the Pacific Crest Trail. "Wild" was released in December 2014 to critical acclaim; Michael Phillips of "Chicago Tribune" wrote in his review, "Witherspoon does the least acting of her career, and it works. Calmly yet restlessly, she brings to life Strayed's longings, her states of grief and desire and her wary optimism." "Wild" was promoted as Witherspoon's primary "comeback" vehicle following her previous career slump, and she earned her second Academy Award nomination for the role.

In May 2014, Witherspoon began production in Louisiana on "Hot Pursuit", a comedy in which she plays a police officer trying to protect a drug lord's widow (Sofía Vergara). The movie was released on May 8, 2015. In 2016, she had a voice role in the animated film "Sing", as well as serving as a major performer on the film's soundtrack. The movie became Witherspoon's biggest hit, being the first to make over $200 million domestically and $500 million worldwide.

In January 2016, Witherspoon began filming her first television project since "Return To Lonesome Dove", the seven-part miniseries adaptation of the Liane Moriarty bestseller, "Big Little Lies". She produced the miniseries, along with her co-star, Nicole Kidman, and the show's director, Jean-Marc Vallée, her second project under his direction. The series premiered on February 19, 2017 on HBO and finished on April 2. Witherspoon has garnered critical acclaim for her performance, with TV Line proclaiming her as "Performer of the Week" of February 26 to March 4. "The Washington Post" compared her performance to her previous work in "Election" and "Legally Blonde".

In November 2016, Witherspoon began production on the romantic comedy "Home Again", the directorial debut of filmmaker Nancy Meyers' daughter, Hallie Meyers-Shyer, which was released on September 8, 2017. A few months later, she began filming the Disney's "A Wrinkle in Time", the film adaptation of Madeleine L'Engle's classic novel of the same name, where she plays Mrs. Whatsit. She co-stars alongside Oprah Winfrey and Mindy Kaling and is directed by Ava DuVernay.

Witherspoon owned a production company called Type A Films, which the media believed was a moniker honoring her childhood nickname "Little Miss Type A." However, when asked about the company by "Interview" magazine, she clarified the name's origin: "... people think I named it after myself... It was actually an in-joke with my family because at [age] 7 I understood complicated medical terms, such as the difference between type A and type B personalities. But I just wished I'd named the company Dogfood Films or Fork or something. You carry that baggage all your life." In March 2012, Witherspoon merged Type A Films with producer Bruna Papandrea's Make Movies banner to create a new production company entitled Pacific Standard. In 2016, Witherspoon and Papandrea split up, with Witherspoon gaining full control over the company.

In 2013, Witherspoon recorded a cover of the classic Frank Sinatra and Nancy Sinatra duet, "Somethin' Stupid" with Michael Bublé for his 2013 album, "To Be Loved".

In May 2015, Witherspoon launched Draper James, a retail brand with a focus on fashion, accessories and home décor inspired by the American South. The brand is named after Witherspoon's grandparents, Dorothea Draper and William James Witherspoon, who are said to be her greatest influences. Some of the products are being manufactured and designed in-house, and the brand launched direct to consumers online before opening its first brick and mortar store in fall 2015 in Witherspoon's hometown of Nashville, Tennessee.

In October 2016, Witherspoon announced that she would be writing her first book.

In November 2016, Witherspoon and Otter Media formed Hello Sunshine, a joint venture focused on telling female-driven stories on film, TV and digital platforms.

In March 2017, Witherspoon became the storyteller-in-chief for Elizabeth Arden, Inc.. There, she will be helping the company to shape the brand's narrative through advertising campaigns and marketing programs. Of her involvement, Witherspoon states that she is "excited to work as a creative partner alongside the Elizabeth Arden team, producing content that celebrates the spirit of the brand, highlighting female-centric stories that illustrate women's true life experiences which unite us all."

Witherspoon is actively involved in children's and women's advocacy organizations. She is a longtime supporter of Save the Children, an organization that helps provide children around the world with education, health care and emergency aid. She also serves on the board of the Children's Defense Fund, a child advocacy and research group. In 2006, she was among a group of actresses who went to New Orleans, Louisiana in a CDF project to publicize the needs of Hurricane Katrina victims. During this trip, she helped open the city's first Freedom School, as she met and talked with the children. Witherspoon later called this an experience that she would never forget.

In 2007, Witherspoon made her first move into the world of endorsements, as she signed a multi-year agreement to serve as the first Global Ambassador of cosmetic company Avon Products. She acts as a spokeswoman for Avon's cosmetic products and serves as the honorary chair of the "Avon Foundation", a charitable organization that supports women and focuses on breast cancer research and the prevention of domestic violence. Witherspoon is also committed to participating in cosmetics product development and appearing in commercial advertisements. Explaining her motives for joining the foundation, she said, "As a woman and a mother I care deeply about the well being of other women and children throughout the world and through the years, I have always looked for opportunities to make a difference."

Witherspoon hosted "Saturday Night Live" on September 29, 2001, the first episode to air after the September 11 attacks. In 2005, she was ranked No. 5 in "Teen People" magazine's list of most powerful young Hollywood actors. In 2006, Witherspoon was listed among the Time 100. Her featured article was written by Luke Wilson. In the same year, she was selected as one of the "100 Sexiest Women In The World" by the readers of "FHM". Witherspoon has been featured four times in the annual "100 Most Beautiful" issues of "People" magazine. Witherspoon has appeared on the annual Celebrity 100 list by "Forbes" magazine in 2006 and 2007, at No. 75 and No. 80, respectively. "Forbes" also put her on the top ten Trustworthy Celebrities list. She was listed among "CEOWorld Magazine"'s Top Accomplished Women Entertainers.

In 2007, she was selected by "People" and the entertainment news program "Access Hollywood" as one of the year's best-dressed female stars. The yellow dress she wore to that year's Golden Globe Awards was widely acclaimed. A study conducted by E-Poll Market Research showed that Witherspoon was the most likable female celebrity of 2007. That same year, Witherspoon established herself as the highest-paid actress in the American film industry, earning $15 to $20 million per film. In recent years, however, her appearance in a number of movies that fared badly at the box office caused a turnabout in her status, and she has been noted as one of the most overpaid actors in Hollywood in 2011, 2012 and 2013. In April 2011, Witherspoon ranked 3rd on the 22nd annual "People's Most Beautiful" issue.

On December 1, 2010, Witherspoon received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame at 6262 Hollywood Blvd.

In June 2013, Witherspoon filed suit against Marketing Advantages International Inc., claiming it used her name and image extensively in jewelry advertising without her permission, both throughout the United States and internationally. In December 2015, while Witherspoon's trademark claims to her name were rejected, for she had not established secondary meaning to her full name, that she did not claim "emotional distress" and the "photos and facts were generally known by the public and the photos were taken in public with Plaintiff's consent", the court ruled that she could proceed with her right of publicity claims against a number of defendants. Two months later, Witherspoon withdrew her lawsuit, having "come to private agreements with the various defendants, including Centerbrook Sales, Fragrance Hut, Gemvara, and others".

In 2015, Witherspoon made her second appearance among the Time 100, with her featured article being written by Mindy Kaling. The same year, she was awarded, by a unanimous vote from the committee, the American Cinematheque for being "a perfect example of an actress flourishing in today’s world" and "an active and successful movie producer who is moving her career forward both behind and in front of the camera".

Witherspoon has cited actresses like Meryl Streep, Holly Hunter, Susan Sarandon, Frances McDormand, Debra Winger, Diane Ladd, Julia Roberts, Nicole Kidman, Jodie Foster, Jennifer Aniston, Goldie Hawn, Sally Field, Sigourney Weaver, Lucille Ball, Carole Lombard, Judy Holliday, Gena Rowlands, and actors like Tom Hanks, Jack Nicholson, and Michael Keaton as influences in her acting. Her favorite films are "Splendor in the Grass", "Waiting For Guffman", "Broadcast News", "Raising Arizona", and "Overboard".

Witherspoon met actor Ryan Phillippe at her 21st birthday party in March 1997. They became engaged in December 1998 and married near Charleston, South Carolina, on June 5, 1999, at Old Wide Awake Plantation. They have two children together, a daughter, born in 1999, and a son born in 2003. In October 2006, Witherspoon and Phillippe announced that they were separating.

In early February 2010, it was reported that Witherspoon had begun dating Jim Toth, a talent agent and co-head of motion picture talent at the Creative Artists Agency, where Witherspoon is a client. Witherspoon and Toth announced their engagement in December 2010, and married on March 26, 2011 in Ojai, California, at Libbey Ranch, Witherspoon's country estate (which she since has sold). The couple have a son, born in 2012.

Witherspoon is an Episcopalian.

Early in the morning of April 19, 2013, while in Atlanta, Georgia filming "The Good Lie", Witherspoon and Toth were pulled over after the car in which they were traveling was seen weaving across a double line on Peachtree Street. Toth, who was driving, was found to have a blood alcohol level of 0.139 and was arrested and charged with driving under the influence and failing to maintain a lane. Witherspoon was arrested and charged with disorderly conduct for disobeying the arresting officer's instructions to remain in the vehicle. Witherspoon pleaded no contest and was fined $313, including court costs.

In the wake of the Harvey Weinstein sexual abuse allegations, Witherspoon revealed that she had been sexually assaulted by a director at the age of 16 and has had "multiple experiences of harassment and sexual assault" throughout her career.

Witherspoon has won numerous awards, including the BAFTA Award and the Academy Award for Best Performance by an Actress in a Leading Role for her performance in "Walk the Line" in 2005. In 2015, Witherspoon was nominated for another Academy Award in the same category, this time for her performance in "Wild".



</doc>
<doc id="243685" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=243685" title="Julianne Moore">
Julianne Moore

Julianne Moore (born Julie Anne Smith; December 3, 1960) is an American actress, prolific in films since the early 1990s. She is particularly known for her portrayals of emotionally troubled women in both independent and Hollywood films, and has received many accolades, including the Academy Award for Best Actress.

After studying theatre at Boston University, Moore began her career with a series of television roles. From 1985 to 1988, she was a regular in the soap opera "As the World Turns", earning a Daytime Emmy for her performance. Her film debut was in "" (1990), and she continued to play small roles for the next four years – including in the thriller "The Hand That Rocks the Cradle" (1992). Moore first received critical attention with Robert Altman's "Short Cuts" (1993), and successive performances in "Vanya on 42nd Street" (1994) and "Safe" (1995) continued this acclaim. Starring roles in the blockbusters "Nine Months" (1995) and "" (1997) established her as a leading actress in Hollywood.

Moore received considerable recognition in the late 1990s and early 2000s, earning Oscar nominations for "Boogie Nights" (1997), "The End of the Affair" (1999), "Far from Heaven" (2002) and "The Hours" (2002). In the first of these she played a 1970s pornographic actress, while the other three featured her as an unhappy, mid-20th century housewife. She also had success with the films "The Big Lebowski" (1998), "Magnolia" (1999), "Hannibal" (2001), "Children of Men" (2006), "A Single Man" (2009), "The Kids Are All Right" (2010), and "Crazy, Stupid, Love" (2011), and won several awards for her portrayal of Sarah Palin in the television film "Game Change" (2012). The year 2014 was key for Moore, as she gave an Oscar-winning performance as an Alzheimer's patient in "Still Alice", was named Best Actress at the Cannes Film Festival for "Maps to the Stars", and joined the lucrative "Hunger Games" series.

In addition to acting, Moore has written a series of children's books about a character named "Freckleface Strawberry". She is married to director Bart Freundlich, with whom she has two children.

Moore was born Julie Anne Smith on December 3, 1960, at the Fort Bragg army installation in North Carolina, the oldest of 3 siblings. Her father, Peter Moore Smith, was a paratrooper in the United States Army during the Vietnam War, who later attained the rank of colonel and became a military judge. Her Scottish mother, Anne (née Love; 1940–2009), was a psychologist and social worker from Greenock, Scotland, who immigrated to the United States in 1951 with her family. Moore has a younger sister, Valerie, and a younger brother, the novelist Peter Moore Smith.
As Moore is half-Scottish, she claimed British citizenship in 2011 to honor her deceased mother.
Moore frequently moved around the United States as a child, due to her father's occupation. She was close to her family as a result, but has said she never had the feeling of coming from one particular place. The family lived in multiple locations, including Alabama, Georgia, Texas, Panama, Nebraska, Alaska, New York, and Virginia, and Moore attended nine different schools. The constant relocating made her an insecure child, and she struggled to establish friendships. Despite these difficulties, Moore later remarked that an itinerant lifestyle was beneficial to her future career: "When you move around a lot, you learn that behavior is mutable. I would change, depending on where I was ... It teaches you to watch, to reinvent, that character can change."

When Moore was 16, the family moved from Falls Church, Virginia, where Moore had been attending J.E.B. Stuart High School, to Frankfurt, Germany, where she attended Frankfurt American High School. She was clever and studious, a self-proclaimed "good girl", and she planned to become a doctor. She had never considered performing, or even attended the theatre, but she was an avid reader and it was this hobby that led her to begin acting at the school. She appeared in several plays, including "Tartuffe" and "Medea", and with the encouragement of her English teacher she chose to pursue a theatrical career. Moore's parents supported her decision, but asked that she train at university to provide the added security of a college degree. She was accepted to Boston University and graduated with a BFA in Theatre in 1983.

Moore moved to New York City after graduating, and worked as a waitress. After registering her stage name with Actors' Equity, she began her career in 1985 with off-Broadway theatre. Her first screen role came in 1985, in an episode of the soap opera "The Edge of Night". Her break came the following year, when she joined the cast of "As the World Turns". Playing the dual roles of half-sisters Frannie and Sabrina Hughes, she found this intensive work to be an important learning experience, and she said of it fondly: "I gained confidence and learned to take responsibility." Moore performed on the show until 1988, when she won a Daytime Emmy Award for Outstanding Ingenue in a Drama Series. Before leaving "As the World Turns", she had a role in the 1987 CBS miniseries "I'll Take Manhattan." Once she had finished the soap opera, she turned to the stage to play Ophelia in a Guthrie Theater production of "Hamlet" opposite Željko Ivanek. The actress returned intermittently to television over the next three years, appearing in the TV movies "Money, Power, Murder" (1989), "The Last to Go" (1991), and "Cast a Deadly Spell" (1991).

In 1990, Moore began working with stage director Andre Gregory on a workshop theatre production of Chekhov's "Uncle Vanya". Described by Moore as "one of the most fundamentally important acting experiences I ever had", the group spent four years exploring the text and giving intimate performances to friends. Also in 1990, Moore made her cinematic debut as a mummy's victim in "", a low-budget horror that she later described as "terrible". Her next film role, in 1992, introduced her to a wide audience. The thriller "The Hand That Rocks the Cradle"—in which she played the main character's ill-fated friend—was number one at the US box office, and Moore caught the attention of several critics with her performance. She followed it the same year with the crime comedy "The Gun in Betty Lou's Handbag", appearing as the protagonist's kooky sister. Moore continued to play supporting roles throughout 1993, first featuring in the erotic thriller "Body of Evidence" as Madonna's love rival. The film was a failure and widely mocked, and she later regretted her involvement. She had greater success in a 1993 romantic comedy with Johnny Depp. In "Benny & Joon", she played a gentle waitress who falls for Aidan Quinn's character, Benny. Moore also appeared briefly as a doctor in one of the year's biggest hits, the Harrison Ford thriller "The Fugitive".

The filmmaker Robert Altman saw Moore in the "Uncle Vanya" production, and was sufficiently impressed to cast her in his next project: the ensemble drama "Short Cuts" (1993), based on short stories by Raymond Carver. Moore was pleased to work with him, as his film "3 Women" (1977) gave her a strong appreciation for cinema when she saw it in college. Playing artist Marian Wyman was an experience she found difficult, as she was a "total unknown" surrounded by established actors, but this proved to be Moore's breakout role. "Variety" magazine described her as "arresting" and noted that her monologue, delivered naked from the waist down, would "no doubt be the most discussed scene" of the film. "Short Cuts" was critically acclaimed, and received awards for Best Ensemble Cast at the Venice Film Festival and the Golden Globe Awards. Moore received an individual nomination for Best Supporting Female at the Independent Spirit Awards, and the monologue scene earned her a degree of notoriety.

"Short Cuts" was one of a trio of successive film appearances that boosted Moore's reputation. It was followed in 1994 with "Vanya on 42nd Street", a filmed version of her ongoing "Uncle Vanya" workshop production, directed by Louis Malle. Moore's performance of Yelena was described as "simply outstanding" by "Time Out," and she won the Boston Society of Film Critics award for Best Actress. Following this, Moore was given her first leading role, playing an unhappy suburban housewife who develops multiple chemical sensitivity in Todd Haynes' low-budget film "Safe" (1995). She had to lose a substantial amount of weight for the role, which made her ill, and she vowed never to change her body for a film again. In their review, "Empire" magazine writes that "Safe" "first established [Moore's] credentials as perhaps the finest actress of her generation." The film historian David Thomson later described it as "one of the most arresting, original and accomplished films of the 1990s," and the performance earned Moore an Independent Spirit Award nomination for Best Actress. Reflecting on these three roles, Moore has said, "They all came out at once, and I suddenly had this profile. It was amazing."

Moore's next appearance was a supporting role in the comedy–drama "Roommates" (1995), playing the wife of Peter Falk. Her following film, "Nine Months" (1995), was crucial in establishing her as a leading lady in Hollywood. The romantic comedy, directed by Chris Columbus and co-starring Hugh Grant, was poorly reviewed but a box office success; it remains one of her highest-grossing films. Her next release was also a Hollywood production, as Moore appeared alongside Sylvester Stallone and Antonio Banderas in the thriller "Assassins" (1995). Despite negativity from critics, the film earned $83.5 million worldwide. Moore's only appearance of 1996 came in the Merchant Ivory film "Surviving Picasso", where she played the artist Dora Maar opposite Anthony Hopkins. The period drama met with poor reviews.

A key point in Moore's career came when she was cast by Steven Spielberg to star as paleontologist Dr. Sarah Harding in ""—the sequel to his 1993 blockbuster "Jurassic Park". Filming the big-budget production was a new experience for Moore, and she has said she enjoyed herself "tremendously". It was a physically demanding role, with the actress commenting, "There was so much hanging everywhere. We hung off everything available, plus we climbed, ran, jumped off things ... it was just non-stop." "The Lost World" (1997) finished as one of the ten highest-grossing films in history to that point, and was pivotal in making Moore a sought-after actress: "Suddenly I had a commercial film career," she said. "The Myth of Fingerprints" was her second film released in 1997. During its production she met her future husband in director Bart Freundlich. Later that year, Moore made a cameo appearance in the dark comedy "Chicago Cab".

The late 1990s and early 2000s saw Moore achieve significant industry recognition. Her first Academy Award nomination came for the critically acclaimed "Boogie Nights" (1997), which centers on a group of individuals working in the 1970s pornography industry. Director Paul Thomas Anderson was not a well-known figure before its production, with only one feature credit to his name, but Moore agreed to the film after being impressed with his "exhilarating" script. The ensemble piece featured Moore as Amber Waves, a leading porn actress and mother-figure who longs to be reunited with her real son. Martyn Glanville of the BBC commented that the role required a mixture of confidence and vulnerability, and was impressed with Moore's effort. "Time Out" called the performance "superb", while Janet Maslin of "The New York Times" found it "wonderful". Alongside her Oscar nomination for Best Supporting Actress, Moore was nominated at the Golden Globe and Screen Actors Guild awards, and several critics groups named her a winner.

Moore followed her success in "Boogie Nights" with a role in the Coen brothers' dark comedy "The Big Lebowski" (1998). The film was not a hit at the time of release but subsequently became a cult classic. Her role was Maude Lebowski, a feminist artist and daughter of the eponymous character who becomes involved with "The Dude" (Jeff Bridges, the film's star). At the end of 1998, Moore had a flop with Gus Van Sant's "Psycho", a remake of the classic Alfred Hitchcock film of the same name. She played Lila Crane in the film, which received poor reviews and is described by "The Guardian" as one of her "pointless" outings. The review in "Boxoffice" magazine regretted that "a group of enormously talented people wasted several months of their lives" on the film.

After reuniting with Robert Altman for the dark comedy "Cookie's Fortune" (1999), Moore starred in "An Ideal Husband"—Oliver Parker's adaptation of the Oscar Wilde play. Set in London at the end of the 19th century, her performance of Mrs. Laura Cheverly earned a Golden Globe nomination for Best Actress in a Musical or Comedy. She was also nominated in the Drama category that year for her work in "The End of the Affair" (1999). Based on the novel by Graham Greene, Moore played opposite Ralph Fiennes as an adulterous wife in 1940s Britain. The critic Michael Sragow was full of praise for her work, writing that her performance was "the critical element that makes [the film] necessary viewing." Moore received her second Academy Award nomination for the role—her first for Best Actress—as well as nominations at the British Academy (BAFTA) and Screen Actors Guild (SAG) awards.

In between her two Golden Globe-nominated performances, Moore was seen in "A Map of the World", supporting Sigourney Weaver, as a bereaved mother. Her fifth and final film of 1999 was the acclaimed drama "Magnolia", a "giant mosaic" chronicling the lives of multiple characters over one day in Los Angeles. Paul Thomas Anderson, in his follow-up to "Boogie Nights", wrote a role specifically for Moore. His primary objective was to "see her explode", and he cast her as a morphine-addicted wife. Moore has said it was a particularly difficult role, but she was rewarded with a SAG nomination. She was subsequently named Best Supporting Actress of 1999 by the National Board of Review, in recognition of her three performances in "Magnolia", "An Ideal Husband", and "A Map of the World".

Apart from a cameo role in the comedy "The Ladies Man", Moore's only other appearance in 2000 was in a short-film adaptation of Samuel Beckett's play "Not I". In early 2001, she appeared as FBI Agent Clarice Starling in "Hannibal", a sequel to the Oscar winning film "The Silence of the Lambs". Jodie Foster had declined to reprise the role, and director Ridley Scott eventually cast Moore, over Angelina Jolie, Cate Blanchett, Gillian Anderson, and Helen Hunt. The change in actress received considerable attention from the press, but Moore claimed she was not interested in upstaging Foster. Despite mixed reviews, "Hannibal" earned $58 million in its opening weekend and finished as the tenth-highest-grossing film of the year. Moore starred in three more 2001 releases: with David Duchovny in the science fiction–comedy "Evolution", in her husband's dramatic film "World Traveler", and with Kevin Spacey, Judi Dench, and Cate Blanchett in "The Shipping News". All three films were poorly received.

The year 2002 marked a high point in Moore's career, as she became the ninth performer to be nominated for two Academy Awards in the same year. She received a Best Actress nomination for the melodrama "Far from Heaven", in which she played a 1950s housewife whose world is shaken when her husband reveals he is gay. The role was written specifically for her by Todd Haynes, the first time the pair had worked together since "Safe", and Moore described it as "a very, very personal project ... such an incredible honor to do." David Rooney of "Variety" praised her "beautifully gauged performance" of a desperate woman "buckling under social pressures and putting on a brave face". Manohla Dargis of the "Los Angeles Times" wrote, "what Moore does with her role is so beyond the parameters of what we call great acting that it nearly defies categorization." The role won Moore the Best Actress award from 19 different organizations, including the Venice Film Festival and the National Board of Review.

Moore's second Oscar nomination that year came for "The Hours", which she co-starred in with Nicole Kidman and Meryl Streep. She again played a troubled 1950s housewife, prompting Kenneth Turan to write that she was "essentially reprising her "Far from Heaven" role". Moore said it was an "unfortunate coincidence" that the similar roles came at the same time, and claimed that the characters had differing personalities. Peter Travers of "Rolling Stone" called the performance "wrenching", while Peter Bradshaw of "The Guardian" praised a "superbly controlled, humane performance". "The Hours" was nominated for nine Academy Awards, including Best Picture. Moore also received BAFTA and SAG Award nominations for Best Supporting Actress, and was jointly awarded the Silver Bear for Best Actress with Kidman and Streep at the Berlin Film Festival.

Moore did not make any screen appearances in 2003, but returned in 2004 with three films. There was no success in her first two ventures of the year: "Marie and Bruce", a dark comedy co-starring Matthew Broderick, did not get a cinematic release; "Laws of Attraction" followed, where she played opposite Pierce Brosnan in a courtroom-based romantic comedy, but the film was panned by critics. Commercial success returned to Moore with "The Forgotten", a psychological thriller in which she played a mother who is told her dead son never existed. Although the film was unpopular with critics, it opened as the US box office number one.

In 2005, Moore worked with her husband for the third time in the comedy "Trust the Man", and starred in the true story of a 1950s housewife, "The Prize Winner of Defiance, Ohio". Her first release of 2006 was "Freedomland", a mystery co-starring Samuel L. Jackson. The response was overwhelmingly negative but her follow-up, Alfonso Cuarón's "Children of Men" (2006), was highly acclaimed. Moore had a supporting role in the dystopian drama, playing the leader of an activist group. It is listed on Rotten Tomatoes as one of the best reviewed films of her career, and was named by Peter Travers as the second best film of the decade.

Moore made her Broadway debut in the world premiere of David Hare's play "The Vertical Hour". The production, directed by Sam Mendes and co-starring Bill Nighy, opened in November 2006. Moore played the role of Nadia, a former war correspondent who finds her views on the 2003 invasion of Iraq challenged. Ben Brantley of "The New York Times" was unenthusiastic about the production, and described Moore as miscast: in his opinion, she failed to bring the "tough, assertive" quality that Nadia required. David Rooney of "Variety" criticized her "lack of stage technique", adding that she appeared "stiffly self-conscious". Moore later confessed that she found performing on Broadway difficult and had not connected with the medium, but was glad to have experimented with it. The play closed in March 2007 after 117 performances.

Moore played an FBI agent for the second time in "Next" (2007), a science fiction action film co-starring Nicolas Cage and Jessica Biel. Based on a short story by Philip K. Dick, the response from critics was highly negative. Manhola Dargis wrote, "Ms. Moore seems terribly unhappy to be here, and it's no wonder." The actress has since described it as her worst film. "Next" was followed by "Savage Grace" (2007), the true story of Barbara Daly Baekeland—a high-society mother whose Oedipal relationship with her son ended in murder. Moore was fascinated by the role. "Savage Grace" had a limited release, and received predominantly negative reviews. Peter Bradshaw, however, called it a "coldly brilliant and tremendously acted movie."

"I'm Not There" (2007) saw Moore work with Todd Haynes for the third time. The film explored the life of Bob Dylan, with Moore playing a character based on Joan Baez. In 2008, she starred with Mark Ruffalo in "Blindness", a dystopian thriller from the director Fernando Meirelles. The film was not widely seen, and critics were generally unenthusiastic. Moore was not seen on screen again until late 2009, with three new releases. She had a supporting role in "The Private Lives of Pippa Lee", and then starred in the erotic thriller "Chloe" with Amanda Seyfried and Liam Neeson. Shortly afterwards, she appeared in the well-received drama "A Single Man". Set in 1960s Los Angeles, the film starred Colin Firth as a homosexual professor who wishes to end his life. Moore played his best friend, "a fellow English expat and semi-alcoholic divorcee", a character that Tom Ford, the film's writer–director, created with her in mind. Leslie Felperin of "Variety" commented that it was Moore's best role in "some time", and was impressed by the "extraordinary emotional nuance" of the performance. "A Single Man" was named one of the 10 best films of the year by the American Film Institute, and Moore received a fifth Golden Globe nomination for her work.

Moore returned to television for the first time in 18 years when she played a guest role in the fourth season of "30 Rock". She appeared in five episodes of the Emmy-winning comedy, playing Nancy Donovan, a love interest for Alec Baldwin's character Jack Donaghy. She later appeared in the series finale in January 2013. She also returned to "As the World Turns", making a cameo appearance as Frannie Hughes at the end of the show's run in 2010. Her first big-screen appearance of the new decade was "Shelter" (2010), a film described as "heinous" by Tim Robey of "The Telegraph". The psychological thriller received negative reviews and did not have a US release until 2013 (retitled "6 Souls").

Moore next starred with Annette Bening in the independent film "The Kids Are All Right" (2010), a comedy–drama about a lesbian couple whose teenage children locate their sperm donor. The role of Jules Allgood was written for her by writer–director Lisa Cholodenko, who felt that Moore was the right age, adept at both drama and comedy, and confident with the film's sexual content. The actress was drawn to the film's "universal" depiction of married life, and committed to the project in 2005. "The Kids Are All Right" was widely acclaimed, eventually garnering an Oscar nomination for Best Picture. The critic Betsy Sharkey praised Moore's performance of Jules, who she called an "existential bundle of unrealized need and midlife uncertainty", writing, "There are countless moments when the actress strips bare before the camera—sometimes literally, sometimes emotionally ... and Moore plays every note perfectly." "The Kids Are All Right" earned Moore a sixth Golden Globe Award nomination and a second BAFTA nomination for Best Actress.

For her next project, Moore actively looked for another comedy. She had a supporting role in "Crazy, Stupid, Love", playing the estranged wife of Steve Carell, which was favorably reviewed and earned $142.8 million worldwide. Moore was not seen on screens again until March 2012, with a performance that received considerable praise and recognition. She starred in the HBO television film "Game Change", a dramatization of Sarah Palin's 2008 campaign to become Vice President. Portraying a well-known figure was something she found challenging; in preparation, she conducted extensive research and worked with a dialect coach for two months. Although the response to the film was mixed, critics were highly appreciative of Moore's performance. For the first time in her career, she received a Golden Globe, a Primetime Emmy, and a SAG Award.

Moore made two film appearances in 2012. The drama "Being Flynn", in which she supported Robert De Niro, had a limited release. Greater success came for "What Maisie Knew", the story of a young girl caught in the middle of her parents' divorce. Adapted from Henry James's novel and updated to the 21st century, the drama earned near-universal critical praise. The role of Susanna, Maisie's rock-star mother, required Moore to sing on camera, which was a challenge she embraced despite finding it embarrassing. She called Susanna a terrible parent, but said the role did not make her uncomfortable as she fully compartmentalized the character: "I know that that's not me".

Following her well-received performance in "What Maisie Knew", Moore began 2013 with a supporting role in Joseph Gordon-Levitt's comedy "Don Jon", playing an older woman who helps the title character to appreciate his relationships. Reviews for the film were favorable, and Mary Pols of "Time" magazine wrote that Moore was a key factor in its success. Her next appearance was a starring role in the comedy "The English Teacher" (2013), but this outing was poorly received and earned little at the box office. In October 2013, she played the demented mother Margaret White in "Carrie", an adaptation of Stephen King's horror novel. Coming 37 years after Brian De Palma's well-known take on the book, Moore stated that she wanted to make the role her own. By drawing on King's writing rather than the 1976 film, Mick LaSalle of the "San Francisco Chronicle" wrote that she managed to "[suggest] a history – one never told, just hinted at – of serious damage in [Margaret's] past." The film was a box office success, but was generally considered an unsuccessful and unnecessary adaptation.

At 53 years old, Moore enjoyed a considerable degree of critical and commercial success in 2014. Her first release of the year came alongside Liam Neeson in the action–thriller "Non-Stop", set aboard an airplane. The response to the film was mixed but it earned $223 million worldwide. She followed this by winning the Best Actress award at the Cannes Film Festival for her portrayal of Havana Segrand, an ageing actress receiving psychotherapy in David Cronenberg's black comedy "Maps to the Stars". Described by "The Guardian" as a "grotesque, gaudy and ruthless" character, Moore based her role on "an amalgam of Hollywood casualties she ha[d] encountered" and drew upon her early experiences in the industry. Peter Debruge of "Variety" criticized the film but found Moore to be "incredible" and "fearless" in it. Moore's success at Cannes made her the second actress in history, after Juliette Binoche, to win at the "Big Three" film festivals (Cannes, Venice, and Berlin). She also received a Golden Globe nomination for the performance.

Moore played the supporting role of President Alma Coin, the leader of a rebellion against The Capitol, in the third installment of the lucrative "Hunger Games" film series, "". The film ranks as her highest-grossing to date. Her final appearance of 2014 was one of the most acclaimed of her career. In the drama "Still Alice", Moore played the leading role of a linguistics professor diagnosed with early onset Alzheimer's disease. She spent four months training for the film, by watching documentaries on the disease and interacting with patients at the Alzheimer's Association. Critic David Thomson wrote that Moore was "extraordinary at revealing the gradual loss of memory and confidence", while according to Kenneth Turan she was "especially good at the wordless elements of this transformation, allowing us to see through the changing contours of her face what it is like when your mind empties out." Several critics commented that it was her finest performance to date, and Moore was awarded with the Oscar, Golden Globe, SAG and BAFTA for Best Actress.

Moore began 2015 by appearing as an evil queen in "Seventh Son", a poorly received fantasy–adventure film co-starring Jeff Bridges. She also appeared opposite Ellen Page in "Freeheld", a drama based on a true story about a detective and her same-sex partner, and in the romantic comedy "Maggie's Plan", with Greta Gerwig and Ethan Hawke. Both films were presented at the 2015 Toronto International Film Festival in September 2015. In "Maggie's Plan", Moore played a pretentious Danish professor, a comic role which critic Richard Lawson of "Vanity Fair" deemed as the film's "chief pleasure". Later that year, she reprised her role as Alma Coin in "", the final film of the series.

After a one-year absence from the screen, Moore had three film releases in 2017. She appeared in a dual role in "Wonderstruck", a film adaptation of Brian Selznick's historical children's novel of the same name, which reteamed her with Todd Haynes. Her parts were of a silent movie star in the 1920s and a deaf librarian in the 1970s; in preparation, she studied sign language and watched the films of Lillian Gish. Richard Lawson considered her to be "eminently watchable" despite her limited screen time. Moore portrayed a dual role for the second time that year in "Suburbicon", a satirical thriller written by the Coen brothers and directed by George Clooney. She was cast opposite Matt Damon as twin sisters in 1950s America, named Rose and Margaret, who become embroiled in a local crime. The film received negative reviews, with critics saying it failed to effectively portray American racism, but Geoffrey Macnab of "The Independent" praised Moore for giving "a perfectly judged comic performance as a Barbara Stanwyck-like femme fatale".

Moore's final release of the year was the sequel to the 2015 spy film "", subtitled "", co-starring Colin Firth, Taron Egerton, Channing Tatum and Halle Berry. She played the part of the villainous entrepreneur Poppy Adams, who runs a drug cartel. Despite her character's actions, Moore played the part to make Poppy seem "strange but reasonable". Peter Debruge described the film as "outlandish" and wrote that Moore had played her part "as Martha Stewart crossed with a demonic 1950s housewife". The film earned over $400 million worldwide.

As of December 2017, Moore will star in "Bel Canto", a thriller based on Ann Patchett’s novel of the same name about the Japanese embassy hostage crisis. She has also committed to play the titular character in "Gloria", a remake of the Chilean film of the same name, about a middle-aged divorcée's quest for love, and will star as the feminist icon Gloria Steinem in the biopic "My Life on the Road".

Moore has been described in the media as one of the most talented and accomplished actresses of her generation. As a woman in her 50s, she is unusual in being an older actress who continues to work regularly and in prominent roles. She enjoys the variety of appearing in both low-budget independent films and large-scale Hollywood productions. In 2004, an IGN journalist wrote of this "rare ability to bounce between commercially viable projects like "Nine Months" to art house masterpieces like "Safe" unscathed", adding, "She is respected in art houses and multiplexes alike." She is noted for playing in a range of material, and the director Ridley Scott, who worked with Moore on "Hannibal", has praised her versatility. In October 2013, Moore was honored with a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame. She has been included in "People" magazine's annual beauty lists on four occasions (1995, 2003, 2008, 2013). In 2015, "Time" magazine named Moore one of the 100 most influential people in the world on the annual "Time 100" list.

Moore is particularly known for playing troubled women, and specializes in "ordinary women who suppress powerful emotions". Oliver Burkeman of "The Guardian" writes that her characters are typically "struggling to maintain a purchase on normality in the face of some secret anguish or creeping awareness of failure". Suzie Mackenzie, also of "The Guardian", has identified a theme of "characters in a state of alienation ... women who have forgotten or lost themselves. People whose identity is a question." Her performances often include small hints at emotional turmoil, until there comes a point when the character breaks. The journalist Kira Cochrane has identified this as a "trademark moment" in many of her best films, while it has led Burkeman to call her the "queen of the big-screen breakdown". "When she does finally crack," writes journalist Simon Hattenstone, "it's a sight to behold: nobody sobs from the soul quite like Moore." Ben Brantley of "The New York Times" has praised Moore's ability to subtly reveal the inner-turmoil of her characters, writing that she is "peerless" in her "portraits of troubled womanhood." When it comes to more authoritative roles, Brantley believes she is "a bit of a bore". "Emotional nakedness is Ms. Moore's specialty," he says, "and it's here that you sense the magic she is capable of."

An interest in portraying "actual human drama" has led Moore to these roles. She is particularly moved by the concept of an individual repressing their troubles and striving to maintain dignity. Parts where the character achieves an amazing feat are of little interest to her, because "we're just not very often in that position in our lives." Early in her career, Moore established a reputation for pushing boundaries, and she continues to be praised for her "fearless" performances and for taking on difficult roles. When asked if there are any roles she has avoided, she replied, "Nothing within the realm of human behaviour." She is known for her willingness to perform nude and appear in sex scenes, although she has said she will only do so if she feels it fits the role.

Regarding her approach to acting, Moore said in a 2002 interview that she leaves 95 percent of the performance to be discovered on set: "I want to have a sense of who a character is, and then I want to get there and have it happen to me on camera." The aim, she said, is to "try to get yourself in a position to let the emotion [happen] to you, that you don't bring the emotion to it ... and when it happens, there's nothing better or more exciting or more rewarding."

Alongside her acting work, Moore has established a career as a children's author. Her first book, "Freckleface Strawberry", was published in October 2007 and became a "New York Times" Best Seller. Described by "Time Out" as a "simple, sweet and semi-autobiographical narrative", it tells the story of a girl who wishes to be rid of her freckles but eventually accepts them. Moore decided to write the book when her young son began disliking aspects of his appearance; she was reminded of her own childhood, when she was teased for having freckles and called "Freckleface Strawberry" by other children.

The book has turned into a series with six follow-ups : "Freckleface Strawberry and the Dodgeball Bully" was published in 2009, and "Freckleface Strawberry: Best Friends Forever" in 2011. Both carry the message that children can overcome their own problems. "Freckleface Strawberry: Backpacks!", "Freckleface Strawberry: Lunch, or What's That?" and "Feckleface Strawberry: Loose Tooth!" were released as part of Random House publishers' "Step Into Reading" program. These were followed by "Freckleface Strawberry and the Really Big Voice" in summer 2016.

"Freckleface Strawberry" has been adapted into a musical, written by Rose Caiola and Gary Kupper, which premiered at the New World Stages, New York, in October 2010. Moore had an input in the production, particularly through requesting that it retain the book's young target audience. The show has since been licensed and performed at several venues, which she calls "extremely gratifying and extremely flattering".

Moore has written one children's book separate from the "Freckleface Strawberry" series. Released in 2013, "My Mom is a Foreigner, But Not to Me" is based on her experiences of growing up with a mother from another country. The book had a negative reception from "Publishers Weekly" and "Kirkus Reviews"; while recognizing it as well-intentioned, Moore's use of verse and rhyme was criticised.

Actor and stage director John Gould Rubin was Moore's first husband, whom she met in 1984 and married two years later. They separated in 1993, and their divorce was finalized in August 1995. "I got married too early and I really didn't want to be there", she has since explained. Moore began a relationship with Bart Freundlich, her director on "The Myth of Fingerprints", in 1996. The couple have a son, Caleb (born December 1997) and a daughter, Liv (born April 2002). They wed in August 2003 and live in Greenwich Village, New York City. Moore has commented, "We have a very solid family life, and it is the most satisfying thing I have ever done." She tries to keep her family close when working and picks material that is practical for her as a parent.

Moore is politically liberal and supported Barack Obama at the 2008 and 2012 presidential elections. She is a pro-choice activist and sits on the board of advocates for Planned Parenthood. She is also a campaigner for gay rights and gun control, and since 2008 she has been an Artist Ambassador for Save the Children. Moore is an atheist; when asked on "Inside the Actors Studio" what God might say to her upon arrival at heaven, she gave God's response as, "Well I guess you were wrong, I do exist."

Moore has said she finds little value in the concept of celebrity and is concerned with living a "normal" life. Upon meeting her, the journalist Suzie Mackenzie described Moore as "the most unostentatious of stars", and she attracts little gossip or tabloid attention. She is humble about her profession, saying she is "just a person with a job", and casual in her appearance. Known for maintaining a natural image, Moore has spoken out against botox and plastic surgery.

, Moore has appeared in 62 feature films, four television movies, and four television series. Her most acclaimed films, according to review-aggregate site Rotten Tomatoes, include:

Her films that have earned the most at the box office are:

Moore has received five Academy Award nominations, nine Golden Globe nominations, seven SAG nominations, and four BAFTA nominations. From these, she has won an Academy Award, two Golden Globes, a BAFTA, and two SAG Awards; she also has a Primetime Emmy and a Daytime Emmy. In addition, she has been named Best Actress at the Cannes Film Festival, Berlin Film Festival, and Venice Film Festival – the fourth person, and second female, in history to achieve this. Her recognized roles came in "As the World Turns", "Boogie Nights", "An Ideal Husband", "The End of the Affair", "Magnolia", "Far From Heaven", "The Hours", "A Single Man", "The Kids Are All Right", "Game Change", "Maps to the Stars", and "Still Alice".




</doc>
<doc id="160126" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=160126" title="Cate Blanchett">
Cate Blanchett

Catherine Elise Blanchett, (; born 14 May 1969) is an Australian actress and theatre director. She has received international acclaim and many accolades for her work, including two Academy Awards, three Golden Globe Awards, three BAFTA Awards, six AACTA Awards, and three Screen Actors Guild Awards. Blanchett came to international attention for her role as Elizabeth I of England in Shekhar Kapur's 1998 film "Elizabeth", for which she won the BAFTA Award for Best Actress, the Golden Globe Award, and earned her first Academy Award for Best Actress nomination. Her portrayal of Katharine Hepburn in Martin Scorsese's 2004 film "The Aviator" brought her critical acclaim and many accolades, including the Academy Award for Best Actress in a Supporting Role, making her the only actor to win an Oscar for portraying another Oscar-winning actor. In 2013, she starred as Jasmine Francis in Woody Allen's "Blue Jasmine", for which she won numerous accolades, including the Academy Award for Best Actress.

Blanchett is one of only six actors, and the only actress, to receive Academy Award nominations for portraying the same role in two films, accomplished with her performance as Queen Elizabeth I. She is additionally the only Australian to win two acting Oscars. A seven-time Oscar nominee, she has also received nominations for "Notes on a Scandal" (2006), "" (2007), "I'm Not There" (2007) and "Carol" (2015). Her other notable films include "The Talented Mr. Ripley" (1999), Peter Jackson's "The Lord of the Rings" trilogy (2001–2003) and "The Hobbit" trilogy (2012–2014), "Babel" (2006), "The Curious Case of Benjamin Button" (2008), "Robin Hood" (2010), "How to Train Your Dragon 2" (2014), "Cinderella" (2015), and "" (2017).

Blanchett has also had an extensive career on stage and is a four-time Helpmann Award winner for Best Female Actor in a Play. Her earlier roles include the title role in "Electra" at the National Institute of Dramatic Art in 1992, Ophelia in "Hamlet" at the Belvoir St Theatre tour to Melbourne in 1994, Susan in "Plenty" in the West End in 1999, and the title role in "Hedda Gabler" with the Sydney Theatre Company in 2004. From 2008 to 2013, she and her husband Andrew Upton were co-CEOs and artistic directors of the Sydney Theatre Company. Her other roles on stage include Blanche DuBois in "A Streetcar Named Desire" in Sydney, New York at the Brooklyn Academy of Music and Washington D.C. at the Kennedy Center in 2009; Yelena in "Uncle Vanya" in Sydney, Washington D.C. at the Kennedy Center and New York at Lincoln Center in 2011; and Claire in "The Maids" in Sydney in 2013 and New York at Lincoln Center in 2014. Blanchett made her Broadway debut in 2017 with "The Present", and received Tony Award, Drama Desk Award, and Drama League Award nominations for her performance in the play.

Blanchett has been awarded the Centenary Medal for Service to Australian Society by the Australian government. She was appointed Chevalier of the Order of Arts and Letters by the French government in 2012. She has been presented with a Doctor of Letters from University of New South Wales, University of Sydney, and Macquarie University in recognition of her extraordinary contribution to the arts, philanthropy and the community. In 2015, she was honoured by the Museum of Modern Art and received the British Film Institute Fellowship in recognition of her outstanding contribution to the industry. In 2017, Blanchett was made a Companion in the Order of Australia for "eminent service to the performing arts as an international stage and screen actor, through seminal contributions as director of artistic organisations, as a role model for women and young performers, and as a supporter of humanitarian and environmental causes."

Blanchett was born on 14 May 1969 in the Melbourne suburb of Ivanhoe. She is the middle of three children; her older brother is a computer systems engineer, and her younger sister is a theatrical designer. Her Australian mother, June (née Gamble), worked as a property developer and teacher, and her American father, Robert DeWitt Blanchett, Jr., a Texas native, was a United States Navy petty officer who later worked as an advertising executive. The two met when Blanchett's father's ship broke down in Melbourne. When Blanchett was 10, her father died of a heart attack, leaving her mother to raise the family on her own. Blanchett's ancestry includes English, some Scottish, and remote French roots.

Blanchett has described herself as being "part extrovert, part wallflower" during childhood. She had a penchant for dressing in traditionally masculine clothing, and went through goth and punk phases during her teenage years, and shaved her head at one point. She attended primary school in Melbourne at Ivanhoe East Primary School; for her secondary education, she attended Ivanhoe Girls' Grammar School and then Methodist Ladies' College, where she explored her passion for the performing arts. In her late teens and early twenties, she worked at a nursing home in Victoria. She studied economics and fine arts at the University of Melbourne but dropped out after one year to travel overseas. While in Egypt, Blanchett was asked to play an American cheerleader, as an extra in the Egyptian boxing movie, "Kaboria"; in need of money, she accepted. Upon her return to Australia, she moved to Sydney and enrolled in the National Institute of Dramatic Art (NIDA) to pursue an acting career. She graduated from NIDA in 1992 with a Bachelor of Fine Arts.

Blanchett's first major stage role was opposite Geoffrey Rush, in the 1992 David Mamet play "Oleanna" for the Sydney Theatre Company. That year, she was also cast as Clytemnestra in a production of Sophocles’ "Electra". A couple of weeks after rehearsals, the actress playing the title role pulled out, and director Lindy Davies cast Blanchett in the role. Her performance as Electra became one of her most acclaimed at NIDA. In 1993, Blanchett was awarded the Sydney Theatre Critics' Best Newcomer Award for her performance in Timothy Daly's "Kafka Dances" and won Best Actress for her performance in Mamet's "Oleanna", making her the first actor to win both categories in the same year. Blanchett played the role of Ophelia in an acclaimed 1994–1995 Company B production of "Hamlet" directed by Neil Armfield, starring Rush and Richard Roxburgh, and was nominated for a Green Room Award. She appeared in the 1994 TV miniseries "Heartland" opposite Ernie Dingo, the miniseries "Bordertown" (1995) with Hugo Weaving, and in an episode of "Police Rescue" entitled "The Loaded Boy". She also appeared in the 50-minute drama short "Parklands" (1996), which received an Australian Film Institute (AFI) nomination for Best Original Screenplay.

Blanchett made her feature film debut with a supporting role as an Australian nurse captured by the Japanese Army during World War II, in Bruce Beresford's film "Paradise Road" (1997), which co-starred Glenn Close and Frances McDormand. Her first leading role was as Lucinda Leplastrier in Gillian Armstrong's romantic drama "Oscar and Lucinda" (1997), opposite Ralph Fiennes. Blanchett received wide acclaim for her performance, and earned her first AFI Award nomination as Best Leading Actress; she lost to Deborah Mailman in "Radiance" (1998). She won the AFI Best Actress Award in the same year for her role as Lizzie in the romantic comedy "Thank God He Met Lizzie" (1997), co-starring Richard Roxburgh and Frances O'Connor. By 1997, Blanchett had accrued significant praise and recognition in her native Australia.

Her first high-profile international role was as Elizabeth I of England in the critically acclaimed film "Elizabeth" (1998), directed by Shekhar Kapur. The film catapulted her to stardom, and her performance garnered wide recognition, earning her the Golden Globe Award and British Academy Award (BAFTA), and her first Screen Actors Guild (SAG) and Academy Award nomination for Best Actress. The following year, Blanchett appeared in "Bangers" (1999), an Australian short film part of "Stories of Lost Souls", a compilation of thematically-related short stories. The short was written and directed by her husband, Andrew Upton, and produced by Blanchett and Upton. She also appeared in the Mike Newell comedy "Pushing Tin" (1999), costarring Billy Bob Thornton and Angelina Jolie (critics singled out Blanchett's performance), and the critically acclaimed Anthony Minghella film "The Talented Mr. Ripley" (1999), alongside Matt Damon, Gwyneth Paltrow, Jude Law, and Philip Seymour Hoffman. She received her second BAFTA nomination for her performance in "The Talented Mr. Ripley".

Already an acclaimed actress, Blanchett received a host of new fans when she appeared in Peter Jackson's Oscar-winning blockbuster trilogy, "The Lord of the Rings", playing the role of Galadriel in all three films. The trilogy holds the record as the highest-grossing film trilogy of all time. In addition to "The Lord of the Rings", 2001 also saw Blanchett diversify her portfolio with a range of roles in the dramas "Charlotte Gray" and "The Shipping News" and the American crime-comedy "Bandits", for which she earned a second Golden Globe and SAG Award nomination. 
In 2002, Blanchett appeared, opposite Giovanni Ribisi, in Tom Tykwer-directed "Heaven", the first film in an unfinished trilogy by acclaimed writer-director Krzysztof Kieślowski. 2003 saw Blanchett again playing a wide range of roles: Galadriel in of the Lord of the Rings film trilogy (which won the Academy Award for Best Picture); the Ron Howard-directed western-thriller "The Missing"; Jim Jarmusch's "Coffee and Cigarettes" – playing two roles (both against herself) – for which she received an Independent Spirit Award for Best Supporting Female nomination; and the biographical film "Veronica Guerin", which earned her a Golden Globe Best Actress Drama nomination.

In 2005, she won her first Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress for her acclaimed portrayal of Katharine Hepburn in Martin Scorsese's "The Aviator". This made Blanchett the first actor to garner an Academy Award for playing an Oscar-winning actor. She lent her Oscar statue to The Australian Centre for the Moving Image. That year, Blanchett won the Australian Film Institute Best Actress Award for her role as Tracy Heart, a former heroin addict, in the Australian film "Little Fish", co-produced by her and her husband's production company, Dirty Films. Though lesser known globally than some of her other films, "Little Fish" received great critical acclaim in Blanchett's native Australia and was nominated for 13 Australian Film Institute awards.

In 2006, she starred opposite Brad Pitt in the multi-lingual, multi-narrative ensemble drama "Babel", directed by Alejandro González Iñárritu, which received seven Academy Award nominations; the Steven Soderbergh-directed drama "The Good German" with George Clooney, and the acclaimed psychological thriller "Notes on a Scandal" opposite Dame Judi Dench. Blanchett received a third Academy Award nomination for her performance in the latter film.

In 2007, Blanchett was named as one of "Time" magazine's 100 Most Influential People in the World and also one of the most successful actresses by "Forbes" magazine. Blanchett had a cameo as Janine, forensic scientist and ex-girlfriend of Simon Pegg's character in Edgar Wright's "Hot Fuzz" (2007). The cameo was uncredited and she gave her fee to charity. She reprised her role as Queen Elizabeth I in the 2007 sequel "", and portrayed Jude Quinn, one of six incarnations of Bob Dylan in Todd Haynes' experimental film "I'm Not There". She won the Volpi Cup Best Actress Award at the Venice Film Festival (accepted by fellow Australian actor and "I'm Not There" co-star Heath Ledger), the Independent Spirit and Golden Globe Best Supporting Actress Award for her portrayal of Jude Quinn. At the 80th Academy Awards, Blanchett received two Academy Award nominations – Best Actress for "Elizabeth: the Golden Age" and Best Supporting Actress for "I'm Not There" – becoming the eleventh actor to receive two acting nominations in the same year, and the first female actor to receive another nomination for the reprisal of a role. Of her achievement that year, critic Roger Ebert said, "That Blanchett could appear in the same Toronto International Film Festival playing Elizabeth and Bob Dylan, both splendidly, is a wonder of acting".

She next appeared in Steven Spielberg's "Indiana Jones and the Kingdom of the Crystal Skull", as the villainous KGB agent Col. Dr. Irina Spalko, Spielberg's favorite villain from the entire series, and in David Fincher's Oscar-nominated "The Curious Case of Benjamin Button", co-starring with Brad Pitt for a second time. Blanchett voiced the character of Granmamare for the English version of the film "Ponyo", released July 2008. On 5 December 2008, Blanchett was inducted into the Hollywood Walk of Fame with a motion pictures star at 6712 Hollywood Boulevard in front of Grauman's Egyptian Theatre.
In 2008, Blanchett and her husband became co-CEOs and artistic directors of the Sydney Theatre Company (STC). Blanchett returned to acting in the theatre in 2009 with the Sydney Theatre Company production of Tennessee Williams' "A Streetcar Named Desire", directed by Liv Ullmann. She starred as Blanche DuBois alongside Joel Edgerton as Stanley Kowalski. Ullmann and Blanchett had been meaning to collaborate on a project since Ullman's intended film adaption of "A Doll's House" fell by the wayside. Blanchett proposed embarking on "Streetcar" to Ullmann, who jumped at the opportunity after initial discussion. 

"A Streetcar Named Desire" production traveled from Sydney to the Brooklyn Academy of Music in New York, and the Kennedy Center in Washington D.C. It was critically and commercially successful and Blanchett received critical acclaim for her performance as Blanche DuBois. "The New York Times" critic Ben Brantley said, "DuBois has been pulled gently and firmly down to earth by Ms. Blanchett and Ms. Ullmann ... What Ms. Blanchett brings to the character is life itself, a primal survival instinct ... Ms. Ullmann and Ms. Blanchett have performed the play as if it had never been staged before, with the result that, as a friend of mine put it, "you feel like you’re hearing words you thought you knew pronounced correctly for the first time."" "The Washington Post"s Peter Marks proclaimed, "What Blanchett achieves in the Sydney Theatre Company's revelatory revival of "A Streetcar Named Desire" amounts to a truly great portrayal – certainly the most heartbreaking Blanche I've ever experienced." John Lahr of "The New Yorker" said of her portrayal, "Blanchett, with her alert mind, her informed heart, and her lithe, patrician silhouette, gets it right from the first beat ... Blanchett doesn’t make the usual mistake of foreshadowing Blanche’s end at the play’s beginning; she allows Blanche a slow, fascinating decline ... I don’t expect to see a better performance of this role in my lifetime." Jane Fonda, who attended a New York show, deemed it "perhaps the greatest stage performance I have ever seen", and Meryl Streep declared, "That performance was as naked, as raw and extraordinary and astonishing and surprising and scary as anything I've ever seen ... She took the layers of a person and just peeled them away. I thought I'd seen that play, I thought I knew all the lines by heart, because I've seen it so many times, but I'd never seen the play until I saw that performance." Blanchett won the Sydney Theatre Award for Best Actress in a Leading Role. The production and Blanchett received Helen Hayes Awards, for Outstanding Non-Resident Production and Outstanding Lead Actress in a Non-Resident Production award, respectively.

In 2010, Blanchett appeared opposite Russell Crowe in Ridley Scott's epic war film "Robin Hood". In 2011, she played the antagonist CIA agent Marissa Wiegler in Joe Wright's action thriller film "Hanna".

In 2011, Blanchett took part in two Sydney Theatre Company productions. She played Lotte Kotte in a new translation of Botho Strauß's 1978 play "Groß und klein" ("Big and Small") from Martin Crimp, directed by Benedict Andrews. After its Sydney run, the production traveled to London, Paris, the Vienna Festival and Ruhrfestspiele. Blanchett and the production received wide acclaim. Blanchett was nominated for the London Evening Standard Award for Best Actress, and won the Sydney Theatre Award for Best Actress in a Leading Role and the Helpmann Award for Best Actress. She then played Yelena, opposite Hugo Weaving and Richard Roxburgh, in Andrew Upton's adaptation of Anton Chekhov's "Uncle Vanya", which traveled to the Kennedy Center and the New York City Center as part of the Lincoln Center Festival. The production and Blanchett received critical acclaim, with "The New York Times" Ben Brantley declaring, "I consider the three hours I spent on Saturday night watching [the characters] complain about how bored they are among the happiest of my theatregoing life ... This Uncle Vanya gets under your skin like no other I have seen ... [Blanchett] confirms her status as one of the best and bravest actresses on the planet." "The Washington Post"s Peter Marks dubbed the production Washington D.C's top theatrical event of 2011. Blanchett received the Helen Hayes Award for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Non-Resident Production, and the Helpmann Award for Best Actress.

Blanchett reprised her role as Galadriel in Peter Jackson's adaptations of "The Hobbit" (2012–2014), prequel to "The Lord of the Rings" series, filmed in New Zealand. She voiced the role of "Penelope" in the "Family Guy" episode "Mr. and Mrs. Stewie", which aired on 29 April 2012, and Queen Elizabeth II in the episode "Family Guy Viewer Mail 2". Blanchett returned to Australian film with her appearance in "The Turning" (2013), an anthology film based on a collection of short stories by Tim Winton. She was head of jury of the 2012 and 2013 Dubai International Film Festival. The Sydney Theatre Company's 2013 season was Blanchett's final one as co-CEO and artistic director.

In 2013, Blanchett played Jasmine French, the lead role in Woody Allen's "Blue Jasmine", co-starring Alec Baldwin and Sally Hawkins. She received rave reviews for her performance, with some critics calling it the best role of her career (surpassing her acclaimed starring role in "Elizabeth"). The performance earned her more than 40 industry and critics awards, including LAFCA Award, NYFCC Award, NSFC Award, Critics' Choice Award, Santa Barbara International Film Festival Outstanding Performance of the Year Award, Australian Academy Award (AACTA), SAG award, Golden Globe award, BAFTA award, Independent Film Spirit Award and the Academy Award for Best Actress. Blanchett's win made her just the sixth actress to win an Oscar in both of the acting categories, the third to win Best Actress after Best Supporting Actress, and the first Australian to win more than one acting Oscar.

In 2014, Blanchett co-starred with Matt Damon and George Clooney in the latter's film, "The Monuments Men", based on the true story of a crew of art historians and museum curators who recover renowned works of art stolen by Nazis. The film featured an ensemble cast, including John Goodman, Bill Murray, Hugh Bonneville, and Jean Dujardin. She voiced the part of Valka in 2014's "How to Train Your Dragon 2". The animated film was a critically acclaimed, box-office success, won the Golden Globe Award for Best Animated Feature Film and received an Academy Award nomination. Blanchett guest starred on the Australian show "Rake", as the onscreen female version of Richard Roxburgh's rogue protagonist, Cleaver. On 29 January 2015, she co-hosted the 4th AACTA Awards with Deborah Mailman.

In 2015, Blanchett starred in five films. She portrayed Nancy in Terrence Malick's "Knight Of Cups", which premiered at the Berlin International Film Festival. "Indiewire" named Blanchett's performance in "Knight of Cups" one of the 15 best performances in Terrence Malick films. She then portrayed Lady Tremaine, Cinderella's evil stepmother, in Disney's live-action re-imagining of Charles Perrault's "Cinderella" and the 1950 animated film, to critical acclaim. She starred opposite Rooney Mara in "Carol", the film adaption of Patricia Highsmith's "The Price of Salt", reuniting her with director Todd Haynes. Blanchett is an executive producer on the film. She received Academy Award, Golden Globe Award, and BAFTA Award nominations for her performance in "Carol". She also portrayed Mary Mapes opposite Robert Redford's Dan Rather in "Truth", a film about the Killian documents controversy. Blanchett's production company was a producing partner for the film. Blanchett also appeared in "Manifesto", Julian Rosefeldt's multi-screen video installation, in which 12 artist manifestos are depicted by 13 different characters played by Blanchett. In 2016, Blanchett narrated one of two versions of Terence Malick's documentary on Earth and the universe, "Voyage of Time", which had its world premiere at the 73rd Venice Film Festival.

In 2017, Blanchett starred in the Sydney Theater Company play "The Present", Andrew Upton's adaption of Anton Chekhov's play "Platonov", directed by John Crowley. The production, co-starring Richard Roxburgh, Toby Schmitz and Jacqueline McKenzie debuted in Sydney in 2015, to critical acclaim, and transferred to Broadway in 2017, marking Blanchett's Broadway debut. Blanchett's performance during the play's Broadway run also received critical acclaim. She received a Tony Award nomination for Best Performance by an Actress in a Leading Role in a Play, a Drama Desk Award nomination, and a Drama League Award nomination for the Distinguished Performance Award. In 2017, Blanchett also appeared in Malick's "Song to Song", shot back-to-back with "Knight of Cups" in 2012. She portrayed the villain Hela in the 2017 Marvel Comics superhero film "", directed by Taika Waititi.

In 2018, Blanchett will star in the all-female spin-off of the "Ocean's Eleven" franchise directed by Gary Ross, "Ocean's 8", opposite Sandra Bullock, Mindy Kaling, Anne Hathaway, and Helena Bonham Carter. Blanchett will also voice the sinister python Kaa in Andy Serkis' adaptation of "The Jungle Book" titled "Mowgli", in which he will mix motion capture, CG animation, and live action.

Blanchett will develop and direct Australian drama series "Stateless" based on the life and controversial mandatory detention case of Cornelia Rau. The project is funded by Screen Australia, and co-produced by Blanchett and Andrew Upton's production company. In September 2015, it was announced that Blanchett would portray Lucille Ball in "Lucy and Desi", written by Aaron Sorkin and produced by Ball's two children. Amazon Studios acquired the rights to the film in August 2017. In November 2015, it was reported that Blanchett was in talks to appear in the film adaptation of the best-selling book "Where'd You Go, Bernadette", which will be directed by Richard Linklater.

In 2018, Cate Blanchett was announced as President of the Jury of the Festival de Cannes, the 71st edition of which will be taking place in May 2018.

Blanchett is married to playwright and screenwriter Andrew Upton. They met in 1996 on the set of a TV show and were married on 29 December 1997. Blanchett and Upton have three sons and one adopted daughter. Blanchett said that she and her husband had been wanting to adopt ever since the birth of their first child. After making Brighton, England their main family home for nearly 10 years, she and her husband returned to their native Australia in 2006. In November 2006, Blanchett attributed this move to desires to select a permanent home for her children, to be closer to her family, and to have a sense of belonging to the Australian theatrical community. She and her family lived in the Sydney suburb of Hunters Hill. Their Hunters Hill residence underwent extensive renovations in 2007 to be made more eco-friendly. Following the sale of their property there in late 2015, Blanchett and Upton purchased a house in East Sussex, England in early 2016.

Blanchett has spoken about feminism and politics, telling Sky News in 2013 that she was concerned that "a wave of conservatism sweeping the globe" was threatening women's role in society. She has also commented on the pressures women in Hollywood face now: "Honestly, I think about my appearance less than I did ten years ago. People talk about the golden age of Hollywood because of how women were lit then. You could be Joan Crawford and Bette Davis and work well into your 50s, because you were lit and made into a goddess. Now, with everything being sort of gritty, women have this sense of their use-by date."

Blanchett is a patron and ambassador of the Australian Film Institute and its academy, the Australian Academy of Cinema and Television Arts. She is also a patron of the Sydney Film Festival, and the development charity SolarAid. She became a spokesperson for and the face of SK-II, the luxury skin care brand owned by Procter & Gamble, in 2005. In 2006, Blanchett joined former US Vice-President Al Gore's Climate Project. In 2007, Blanchett became the ambassador for the Australian Conservation Foundation. She was made an honorary life member of the Australian Conservation Foundation in 2012, in recognition of her support for environmental issues. At the beginning of 2011, Blanchett lent her support for a carbon tax. She received some criticism for this, particularly from conservatives. In January 2014, Blanchett took part in the Green Carpet Challenge, an initiative to raise the public profile of sustainable fashion, founded by Livia Firth of Eco-Age. Blanchett is a patron of the new Australian Pavilion in the Venice Biennale, and spoke at its opening at the Venice Giardini in May 2015. Blanchett spoke at former Prime Minister of Australia Gough Whitlam's state funeral in 2014, and at the Margaret Whitlam dinner and fundraiser event hosted by Tanya Plibersek MP in June 2015.

In May 2016, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) announced the appointment of Blanchett as a global Goodwill Ambassador. Blanchett, along with other celebrities, featured in a video from the UNHCR to help raise awareness to the global refugee crisis. The video, titled "What They Took With Them", has the actors reading a poem written by Jenifer Toksvig and inspired by primary accounts of refugees, and is part of UNHCR's "WithRefugees" campaign, which also includes a petition to governments to expand asylum to provide further shelter, integrating job opportunities, and education.

Blanchett has appeared in over 50 films and over 20 theatre productions. Directors she has worked with include Woody Allen, Wes Anderson, Gillian Armstrong, Bruce Beresford, Kenneth Branagh, Richard Eyre, David Fincher, Todd Haynes, Lasse Hallström, Ron Howard, Alejandro González Iñárritu, Peter Jackson, Jim Jarmusch, Barry Levinson, Richard Linklater, Terrence Malick, Anthony Minghella, Hayao Miyazaki, Mike Newell, Sam Raimi, Martin Scorsese, Steven Soderbergh, Steven Spielberg, Ridley Scott, Taika Waititi, and Joe Wright.

As of 2017, Blanchett's films have grossed more than $10 billion at the worldwide box-office. Blanchett has featured in seven films that were nominated for the Academy Award for Best Picture: "Elizabeth" (1998), "The Lord of the Rings" trilogy (2001, 2002 and 2003), "The Aviator" (2004), "Babel" (2006), and "The Curious Case of Benjamin Button" (2008).

Among her numerous accolades for her performances, Blanchett has received two Academy Awards, three British Academy Awards, three Critics' Choice Movie Awards, three Golden Globe Awards, three Independent Spirit Awards, three Screen Actors Guild Awards, four Helpmann Awards, six Australian Academy Awards, and awards from the Los Angeles Film Critics Association, National Board of Review, National Society of Film Critics, New York Film Critics Circle, and Venice Film Festival. Her performance as Katharine Hepburn in "The Aviator" made her the only actor to win an Oscar for portraying another Oscar-winning actor. Blanchett is only the third actress, after Jessica Lange and Meryl Streep, to win Best Actress after winning Best Supporting Actress. She is one of only six actors (and the only actress) in the history of the Oscars to be nominated twice for portraying the same role in two films (Elizabeth I for "Elizabeth" and ""), and the eleventh actor to receive two acting nominations in the same year. She is also the only Australian actor to win two acting Oscars.

Blanchett received "Premiere" magazine's Icon Award in 2006. In 2008, she received the Santa Barbara International Film Festival Modern Master Award in recognition of her accomplishments in the film industry. That year, she received a Star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame, inducted at 6712 Hollywood Boulevard. She received Women in Film and Television International's Crystal Award for excellence in the entertainment industry in 2014. In 2015, Blanchett was honoured at the Museum of Modern Art's Film Benefit for her outstanding contributions to the industry. She received the British Film Institute Fellowship in recognition of her outstanding contribution to film, presented to her by fellow actor Ian McKellen. Blanchett was the recipient of the AACTA Longford Lyell Award for her "outstanding contribution to the enrichment of Australia’s screen environment and culture." In 2016, she received the Costume Designers Guild Lacoste Spotlight Award, in honour of an "enduring commitment to excellence" and her "appreciation for the artistry of costume design and collaboration with the Costume Designers."

In 2006, a portrait of Blanchett and family painted by McLean Edwards was a finalist for the Art Gallery of New South Wales' Archibald Prize. Another portrait of Blanchett was a finalist for the Archibald Prize in 2014. In 2009, Blanchett appeared in a series of commemorative postage stamps called Australian Legends, in recognition of the outstanding contribution made to Australian entertainment and culture. In 2015, Madame Tussauds unveiled a wax figure of Blanchett draped in a recreation of the Valentino Garavani dress she wore to the 2005 Academy Awards ceremony.

Blanchett was appointed Chevalier of the Order of Arts and Letters by the French Minister of Culture in 2012, in recognition of her significant contributions to the arts. Blanchett was awarded the Centenary Medal for Service to Australian Society by the Australian government. She has been presented with a Doctor of Letters from University of Sydney, University of New South Wales, and Macquarie University, in recognition of her extraordinary contribution to the arts, philanthropy and the community. In 2017, Blanchett was made a Companion in the Order of Australia for "eminent service to the performing arts as an international stage and screen actor, through seminal contributions as director of artistic organisations, as a role model for women and young performers, and as a supporter of humanitarian and environmental causes."





</doc>
<doc id="63534" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63534" title="Greer Garson">
Greer Garson

Eileen Evelyn Greer Garson, CBE (29 September 1904 – 6 April 1996) was a British-American actress popular during the Second World War, being listed by the "Motion Picture Herald" as one of America's top-ten box office draws from 1942 to 1946.

A major star at Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer during the 1940s, Garson received seven Academy Award nominations, including a record five consecutive nominations, winning the Best Actress award for "Mrs. Miniver" (1942).

Greer Garson was born on 29 September 1904 in Manor Park, East Ham, then in Essex, now part of London, the only child of Nina (née Nancy Sophia Greer; died 1958) and George Garson (1865–1906 (41 years old?)), a commercial clerk in a London importing business. Her father was born in London, to Scottish parents, and her mother was from Drumalore (or Drumaloor), County Cavan. The name "Greer" is a contraction of "MacGregor", another family name.

Her maternal grandfather was David Greer, an RIC sergeant in Castlewellan, County Down. In the 1880s he became a land steward to the Annesley family, wealthy landlords who built the town of Castlewellan. David Greer lived in a large detached house built on the lower part of what was known as Pig Street or known locally as the Back Way near Shilliday's builder's yard. The house was called "Claremount" and today the street is named Claremount Avenue. It was often reported erroneously that Greer Garson was born in this house, (The Macmillan International Film Encyclopedia gives her year of birth as 1908 and her place of birth as County Down, Ireland).

Garson was educated at King's College London, where she earned degrees in French and 18th-century literature, and in Grenoble.

Greer Garson's early professional appearances were on stage, starting at Birmingham Repertory Theatre in January 1932. She appeared on television during its earliest years (the late 1930s), most notably starring in a 30-minute production of an excerpt of "Twelfth Night" in May 1937, with Dorothy Black. These live transmissions were part of the BBC's experimental service from Alexandra Palace, and this is the first known instance of a Shakespeare play performed on television.
Louis B. Mayer discovered Garson while he was in London looking for new talent. Garson was signed to a contract with MGM in late 1937, but did not begin work on her first film, "Goodbye, Mr. Chips", until late 1938. She received her first Oscar nomination for the role, but lost to Vivien Leigh for "Gone with the Wind". She received critical acclaim the next year for her role as Elizabeth Bennet in the 1940 film, "Pride and Prejudice".

Garson starred with Joan Crawford in "When Ladies Meet" in 1941 (a remake of a Pre-Code version of the same name, which had starred Ann Harding and Myrna Loy), and that same year became a major box-office star with the sentimental Technicolor drama "Blossoms in the Dust", which brought her the first of five consecutive Best Actress Oscar nominations, tying Bette Davis' 1938–42 record, which still stands.

Garson won the Academy Award for Best Actress in 1942 for her role as a strong British wife and mother in the middle of World War II in "Mrs. Miniver". ("Guinness Book of World Records" credits her with the longest Oscar acceptance speech, at five minutes and 30 seconds, after which the Academy Awards instituted a time limit.) In 1942, Garson also co-starred in the powerful, dramatic film "Random Harvest" with Academy Award winner Ronald Colman. Set at the end of World War I with Ronald Colman as a shell-shocked, amnesiac soldier and Greer Garson as his love interest, Random Harvest received seven Academy Award nominations, including Best Picture. It lost to "Mrs. Miniver," and Garson won the Academy Award for that role. Colman was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Actor for his role in Random Harvest, and Garson couldn't be nominated for her role in that movie because she was already nominated (and subsequently won), for her role as "Mrs. Miniver." Based on a New York Times Best Selling Novel of the same name by James Hilton "("Lost Horizon, Goodbye, Mr. Chips)," "Random Harvest" is one of the greatest love story films ever made, and Greer Garson helped make it that way. 

Garson was also nominated for "Madame Curie" (1943), "Mrs. Parkington" (1944), and "The Valley of Decision" (1945). She frequently costarred with Walter Pidgeon, ultimately making eight pictures with him: "Blossoms in the Dust" (1941), "Mrs. Miniver" (1942), "Madame Curie", "Mrs. Parkington", "Julia Misbehaves" (1948), "That Forsyte Woman" (1949), "The Miniver Story" (1950), and "Scandal at Scourie" (1953).
Garson was partnered with Clark Gable, after his return from war service, in "Adventure" (1945). The film was advertised with the catch-phrase "Gable's back and Garson's got him!" 

Gable argued for "He put the Arson in Garson"; she countered "She put the Able in Gable!"; thereafter, the safer catchphrase was selected. Garson's popularity declined somewhat in the late 1940s, but she remained a prominent film star until the mid-1950s. In 1951, she became a naturalised citizen of the United States. 

She made only a few films after her MGM contract expired in 1954. In 1958, she received a warm reception on Broadway in "Auntie Mame", replacing Rosalind Russell, who had gone to Hollywood to make the film version. In 1960, Garson received her seventh and final Oscar nomination for "Sunrise at Campobello", in which she played Eleanor Roosevelt, this time losing to Elizabeth Taylor for "BUtterfield 8". Greer was special guest on an episode of the TV series "Father Knows Best", playing herself.

On 4 October 1956, Garson appeared with Reginald Gardiner as the first two guest stars of the series, in the premiere of NBC's "The Ford Show, Starring Tennessee Ernie Ford".

Garson appeared as a mystery guest on "What's My Line" on 25 October 1953 and on 6 April 1958 to promote her appearance in "Auntie Mame". She was a panellist on 12 May 1957 episode. She returned to MGM for a role in "The Singing Nun" (1966) starring Debbie Reynolds. Her last film, in 1967, was Walt Disney's "The Happiest Millionaire", although she made infrequent television appearances afterwards. In 1968, she narrated the children's television special "The Little Drummer Boy". Her final role for television was in a 1982 episode of "The Love Boat".

Garson received an honorary Doctor of Arts degree from Southern Methodist University in Dallas, her late husband's alma mater, in 1991.

In 1993, Queen Elizabeth II recognised Garson's achievements by investing her as Commander of the Order of the British Empire (CBE).

Garson was married three times. Her first marriage, on 28 September 1933, was to Edward Alec Abbot Snelson (1904–1992), later Sir Edward, a British civil servant who became a noted judge and expert in Indian affairs. She lived with him briefly in Nagpur, a small town in central India, but eventually returned to the theatre. Sir Edward reportedly grieved at losing her and would watch multiple screenings of any film of hers that played in Nagpur. The actual marriage reportedly lasted only a few weeks, but it was not formally dissolved until 1943.

Her second husband, whom she married (at age 39) on 24 July 1943, was Richard Ney (1916–2004), the younger actor (27 years old) who played her son in "Mrs. Miniver." The relationship was under constant scrutiny due to their age difference, and despite attempts by MGM to portray the image of a happy couple, the marriage was troubled. They divorced in 1947 after several attempts at reconciliation. Ney eventually became a stock-market analyst, financial consultant, and author.

In 1949, Garson married a millionaire Texas oilman and horse breeder, E.E. "Buddy" Fogelson (1900–1987). In 1967, the couple retired to their "Forked Lightning Ranch" in New Mexico. They purchased the US Hall of Fame champion Thoroughbred Ack Ack from the estate of Harry F. Guggenheim in 1971 and were highly successful as breeders. They also maintained a home in Dallas, Texas, where Garson funded the Greer Garson Theatre facility at Southern Methodist University.

Garson was a registered Republican, and in 1966 was asked to run for Congress on the Republican ticket against Democrat Earle Cabell but she declined not wanting to become another show business name mixing with political agendas.

During her later years, Garson was recognised for her philanthropy and civic leadership. She donated several million dollars for the construction of the Greer Garson Theatre at both the Santa Fe University of Art and Design and at Southern Methodist University's Meadows School of the Arts on three conditions: 1) the stages be circular, 2) the premiere production be William Shakespeare's "A Midsummer Night's Dream," and 3) they have large ladies' rooms. Garson was a devout Presbyterian.

The actress suffered a back injury during her first 18 months at MGM, while waiting for a role Mayer deemed worthy of her, and was nearly released from her contract. Her back was injured again while filming "Desire Me" in Monterey on 26 April 1946 when a wave knocked her and co-star Richard Hart from the rocks where they were rehearsing. A local fisherman, and extra in the film, rescued Garson from the surf and potential undertow. She was bruised and in shock and required by doctors to rest for several days. The injury to her back would require several surgeries over the coming years.

From the early 1970s, interest was renewed in the stars of Hollywood's golden age, as their films received regular TV airings, and more facts about performers, as opposed to the information that the studios had circulated about them, came to light. Around this time, a more plausible year of birth for Garson, 1908, began to appear in print. This could have been the year she had given when she took to the stage in the UK, conscious that she was a late starter or, for similar reasons, to MGM at the time she first signed with them. This second date achieved wide credence, until after Garson's death, when obituaries revealed that she had been born four years earlier, in 1904.
In her final years, Garson occupied a penthouse suite at the Presbyterian Hospital in Dallas. She died there from heart failure on 6 April 1996, at the age of 91. She is interred beside her late husband in the Sparkman-Hillcrest Memorial Park Cemetery in Dallas.



</doc>
<doc id="182870" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=182870" title="Marlee Matlin">
Marlee Matlin

Marlee Beth Matlin (born August 24, 1965) is an American actress, author, and activist. She won the Academy Award for Best Actress in a Leading Role for "Children of a Lesser God" (1986) and to date is the only deaf performer to have won the award. Her work in film and television has resulted in a Golden Globe award, with two additional nominations, and four Emmy nominations. Deaf since she was 18 months old, due to illness and high fevers, she is also a prominent member of the National Association of the Deaf. Her longtime interpreter is Jack Jason.

Matlin was born in Morton Grove, Illinois, to Libby (née Hammer) and Donald Matlin (1930–2013), an automobile dealer.

She lost all hearing in her right ear and 80% of the hearing in her left ear at the age of 18 months. In her autobiography "I'll Scream Later", she suggests that her hearing loss may have been due to a genetically malformed cochlea. She is the only member of her family who is Deaf. She and her two older brothers, Eric and Marc, grew up in a Reform Jewish household. Her family roots are in Poland and Russia. Matlin attended a synagogue for the Deaf (Congregation Bene Shalom), and after studying Hebrew phonetically, was able to learn her Torah portion for her Bat Mitzvah. She was later interviewed for the book "Mazel Tov: Celebrities' Bar and Bat Mitzvah Memories".

Matlin graduated from John Hersey High School in Arlington Heights and attended Harper College.

In her autobiography "I'll Scream Later", she described two instances when she was molested: by her babysitter at age 11, and by her teacher in high school.

Matlin made her stage debut at the age of seven, as Dorothy in an International Center on Deafness and the Arts (ICODA) children's theatre of "The Wizard of Oz", and continued to appear with the ICODA children's theatre group throughout her childhood.

Her discovery by Henry Winkler during one of her ICODA theater performances ultimately led to her film debut in "Children of a Lesser God" (1986). That film brought her a Golden Globe Award for Best Actress in a Drama and an Academy Award for Best Actress. Two years later, she made a guest appearance on "Sesame Street" with Billy Joel performing a revised version of "Just the Way You Are" with lyrics by Tony Geiss. Matlin used sign language during the song and hugged Oscar the Grouch during the song's conclusion. One year after that, Billy Joel invited her to perform in his video for "We Didn't Start the Fire" where she played the prom-queen-turned-hippie in the mid portion of that video.

In 1989, Matlin portrayed a Deaf widow in "Bridge to Silence;" in that role, she spoke in addition to using sign language. She was nominated for a Golden Globe for her work as the lead female role in the television series "Reasonable Doubts" (1991–1993). Matlin was nominated for an Emmy Award for a guest appearance in "Picket Fences" (1992), and became a regular on that series during its final season (1996). She played Carrie Buck in the 1994 television drama "Against Her Will: The Carrie Buck Story," based on the United States Supreme Court case "Buck v. Bell" 274 U.S. 200, which the Court heard in 1927. In that role, Matlin portrayed a hearing woman for the first time in her career, which earned her a CableACE Nomination as Best Actress.

Matlin later had recurring roles in "The West Wing", and "Blue's Clues". Other television appearances include "Seinfeld" ("The Lip Reader"), "The Outer Limits" ("The Message"), "ER", "The Practice," and "". She was nominated for Primetime Emmy Awards for her guest appearances in "Seinfeld", "Law & Order: Special Victims Unit", and "The Practice".

In 2002, Matlin published her first novel, titled "Deaf Child Crossing," which was loosely based on her own childhood. She later wrote and published a sequel titled "Nobody's Perfect", produced on stage at the John F. Kennedy Center for Performing Arts in partnership with VSA Arts in October 2007. In 2004, she starred in the movie "What the Bleep Do We Know!?" as Amanda. She also hosted the 3rd annual Festival for Cinema of the Deaf in Chicago, from October 15–18, likewise in 2004.

In 2006, she played a Deaf parent in "Desperate Housewives". She also had a recurring role as Joy Turner's (who made many jokes of Matlin's Deafness at her expense) public defender in "My Name Is Earl" and played the mother of one of the victims in an episode of "." That same year, Matlin was cast in season 4 of "The L Word" as Jodi Lerner, a gay sculptor. She appeared in season 4 (2007), season 5 (2008), and season 6 (2009) as the girlfriend of one of the show's protagonists, Bette Porter, played by Jennifer Beals.

On February 4, 2007, and February 7, 2016, Matlin interpreted the "Star Spangled Banner" in American Sign Language at Super Bowl XLI in Miami, Florida and at Super Bowl 50 in Santa Clara, California, respectively. In January 2008, she appeared on "Nip/Tuck" as a television executive.

In 2008, Matlin participated as a competitor in the sixth season of ABC's "Dancing with the Stars." Her dance partner was newcomer Fabian Sanchez. Matlin and Sanchez were the sixth couple eliminated from the competition.

On May 6, 2009, Matlin received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame.

On November 8, 2009, Matlin appeared on "Seth & Alex's Almost Live Comedy Show", hosted by Seth MacFarlane and Alex Borstein. After Borstein imitated Matlin calling MovieFone and singing "Poker Face," Matlin herself appeared and launched into a comical tirade against Borstein over being made fun of, and how she was not invited to provide her own voice for "Family Guy." Matlin went on to voice Stella, Peter's coworker, in the Season 10 episode "The Blind Side;" Stella later became a recurring character.

In 2010, Matlin produced a pilot for a reality show she titled "My Deaf Family," which she presented to various national network executives. Although they expressed interest, no network purchased rights to the show for ongoing production. On March 29, 2010, Matlin uploaded the pilot to YouTube and launched a viral marketing campaign.

On July 26, 2010, Matlin signed a speech at an event commemorating the 20th anniversary of the Americans with Disabilities Act.

In the following year, Matlin was a finalist on the NBC show "The Celebrity Apprentice," competing to win money for her charity, The Starkey Hearing Foundation, finishing in second place. However, on one episode of "The Celebrity Apprentice", "The Art of the Deal", which was transmitted on April 3, 2011, she raised more funds than had ever been raised for charity in a single event on any television show before—USD$986,000. Donald Trump, who was then moderating "The Celebrity Apprentice," then donated an additional USD$14,000 to make the contribution an even million.

In 2013, Matlin played herself in "". As of January 2015, Matlin also acted as the American Civil Liberties Union's celebrity ambassador for disability rights.

Matlin played the recurring character of Melody Bledsoe on "Switched at Birth". In September 2015, she made her Broadway debut in the revival production of the musical "Spring Awakening."

Beginning in 2017, Matlin played the recurring role of Harriet on the Syfy television series, "The Magicians".

On July 31, 2017, it was announced by Deadline that Matlin will join as a series regular in the third season of the ABC thriller "Quantico" in the role of ex-FBI agent, Jocelyn Turner.

Matlin is actively involved with a number of charitable organizations, including Easter Seals (where she was appointed an Honorary Board Member), the Children Affected by AIDS Foundation, Elizabeth Glaser Pediatric AIDS Foundation, VSA arts, and the Red Cross Celebrity Cabinet. She was appointed by President Clinton in 1994 to the Corporation for National Service and served as chair of National Volunteer Week. Matlin was a participant in the first-ever national television advertising campaign supporting donations to Jewish federations. The program featured "film and television personalities celebrating their Jewish heritage and promoting charitable giving to the Jewish community" and included Greg Grunberg, Joshua Malina, Kevin Weisman, and Jonathan Silverman.

Matlin received an honorary Doctorate of Humane Letters degree from Gallaudet University in 1987. In October 2007, she was appointed to the Gallaudet University Board of Trustees. In 1988, Matlin received the Samuel S. Beard Award for Greatest Public Service by an Individual 35 Years or Under, an award given out annually by Jefferson Awards.

Matlin attended the 1987 Oscars to present the Academy Award for Best Actor. After signing her introduction in ASL, she spoke aloud the "names of the nominees" and of Michael Douglas, the winner. 

On April 14, 2009, Matlin released an autobiography, "I'll Scream Later". In it, she describes her drug abuse and how it drove her to check herself into the Betty Ford Center. She also tells about her rocky, two-year relationship with actor William Hurt, who she claims was physically abusive to her. She also addresses the sexual abuse she suffered as a child at the hands of her female babysitter.

She enjoys a sense of humor about her deafness: "Often I’m talking to people through my speaker phone, and after 10 minutes or so they say, 'Wait a minute, Marlee, how can you hear me?' They forget I have an interpreter there who is signing to me as they talk. So I say, 'You know what? I can hear on Wednesdays.'"

Matlin married Burbank police officer Kevin Grandalski on August 29, 1993, at the home of actor Henry Winkler, five days after her 28th birthday. They first met while she was filming a scene from "Reasonable Doubts" outside the studio grounds; the police department had assigned Grandalski to provide security and control traffic. They have four children: Sarah (born 1996), Brandon (born 2000), Tyler (born 2002), and Isabelle (born 2003).

In recognition of her philanthropic work and her advocacy for the inclusion of people with disabilities, Matlin received the 2016 Morton E. Ruderman Award in Inclusion, a $100,000 prize given annually by the Jay Ruderman of the Ruderman Family Foundation to one individual whose work excels at promoting disability inclusion. She won the Henry Viscardi Achievement Awards for disability advocacy in 2014.





</doc>
<doc id="18823" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18823" title="Mary Pickford">
Mary Pickford

Gladys Louise Smith (April 8, 1892 – May 29, 1979), known professionally as Mary Pickford, was a Canadian-born film actress and producer. She was a co-founder of both the Pickford-Fairbanks Studio (along with Douglas Fairbanks) and, later, the United Artists film studio (with Fairbanks, Charlie Chaplin and D.W. Griffith), and one of the original 36 founders of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences who present the yearly "Oscar" award ceremony.

Known in her prime as "America's Sweetheart" and the "girl with the curls", Pickford was one of the Canadian pioneers in early Hollywood and a significant figure in the development of film acting. Pickford was one of the earliest stars to be billed under her own name, and was one of the most popular actresses of the 1910s and 1920s, earning the nickname "Queen of the Movies". She is credited as having defined the ingénue archetype in cinema. 

She was awarded the second ever Academy Award for Best Actress for her first sound-film role in "Coquette" (1929) and also received an honorary Academy Award in 1976. In consideration of her contributions to American cinema, the American Film Institute ranked Pickford as 24th in its 1999 list of greatest female stars of classic Hollywood Cinema.

Mary Pickford was born Gladys Louise Smith in 1892 (although she would later claim 1893 or 1894 as her year of birth) at 211 University Avenue, Toronto, Ontario. Her father, John Charles Smith, was the son of English Methodist immigrants, and worked a variety of odd jobs. Her mother, Charlotte Hennessey, was of Irish Catholic descent and worked for a time as a seamstress. She had two younger siblings, Charlotte, called "Lottie" (born 1893), and John Charles, called "Jack" (born 1896), who also became actors. To please her husband's relatives, Pickford's mother baptized her children as Methodists, the faith of their father. John Charles Smith was an alcoholic; he abandoned the family and died on February 11, 1898, from a fatal blood clot caused by a workplace accident when he was a purser with Niagara Steamship.

When Gladys was age four, her household was under infectious quarantine, a public health measure. Their devoutly Catholic maternal grandmother (Catherine Faeley Hennessey) asked a visiting Roman Catholic priest to baptize the children. Pickford was at this time baptized as Gladys Marie Smith.

Charlotte Smith began taking in boarders after being widowed. One of these was a theatrical stage manager. At his suggestion, Gladys (age 7) was given two small roles, one as a boy and the other as a girl, in a stock company production of "The Silver King" at Toronto's Princess Theatre. She subsequently acted in many melodramas with Toronto's Valentine Company, finally playing the major child role in their version of "The Silver King". She capped her short career in Toronto with the starring role of Little Eva in their production of "Uncle Tom's Cabin," adapted from the 1852 novel by United States writer and abolitionist Harriet Beecher Stowe. Stowe's novel was, coincidentally, based on the memoirs of another Ontarian, Josiah Henson.

By the early 1900s, theatre had become a family enterprise. Gladys, her mother and two younger siblings toured the United States by rail, performing in third-rate companies and plays. After six impoverished years, Pickford allowed one more summer to land a leading role on Broadway, planning to quit acting if she failed. In 1906 Gladys, Lottie and Jack Smith supported singer Chauncey Olcott on Broadway in "Edmund Burke". Gladys finally landed a supporting role in a 1907 Broadway play, "The Warrens of Virginia". The play was written by William C. deMille, whose brother, Cecil, appeared in the cast. David Belasco, the producer of the play, insisted that Gladys Smith assume the stage name Mary Pickford. After completing the Broadway run and touring the play, however, Pickford was again out of work.

On April 19, 1909, the Biograph Company director D. W. Griffith screen-tested her at the company's New York studio for a role in the nickelodeon film, "Pippa Passes". The role went to someone else but Griffith was immediately taken with Pickford. She quickly grasped that movie acting was simpler than the stylized stage acting of the day. Most Biograph actors earned $5 a day but, after Pickford's single day in the studio, Griffith agreed to pay her $10 a day against a guarantee of $40 a week.

Pickford, like all actors at Biograph, played both bit parts and leading roles, including mothers, ingenues, charwomen, spitfires, slaves, Native Americans, spurned women, and a prostitute. As Pickford said of her success at Biograph:I played scrubwomen and secretaries and women of all nationalities ... I decided that if I could get into as many pictures as possible, I'd become known, and there would be a demand for my work. She appeared in 51 films in 1909 – almost one a week. While at Biograph, she suggested to Florence La Badie to "try pictures", invited her to the studio and later introduced her to D. W. Griffith, who launched La Badie's career.

In January 1910, Pickford traveled with a Biograph crew to Los Angeles. Many other film companies wintered on the West Coast, escaping the weak light and short days that hampered winter shooting in the East. Pickford added to her 1909 Biographs ("Sweet and Twenty", "They Would Elope," and "To Save Her Soul", to name a few) with films made in California.

Actors were not listed in the credits in Griffith's company. Audiences noticed and identified Pickford within weeks of her first film appearance. Exhibitors in turn capitalized on her popularity by advertising on sandwich boards that a film featuring "The Girl with the Golden Curls", "Blondilocks", or "The Biograph Girl" was inside.

Pickford left Biograph in December 1910. The following year, she starred in films at Carl Laemmle's Independent Moving Pictures Company (IMP). IMP was absorbed into Universal Pictures in 1912, along with Majestic. Unhappy with their creative standards, Pickford returned to work with Griffith in 1912. Some of her best performances were in his films, such as "Friends", "The Mender of Nets", "Just Like a Woman", and "The Female of the Species". That year Pickford also introduced Dorothy and Lillian Gish (both friends from her days in touring melodrama) to Griffith. Both became major silent stars, in comedy and tragedy, respectively. Pickford made her last Biograph picture, "The New York Hat," in late 1912.

She returned to Broadway in the David Belasco production of "A Good Little Devil" (1912). This was a major turning point in her career. Pickford, who had always hoped to conquer the Broadway stage, discovered how deeply she missed film acting. In 1913, she decided to work exclusively in film. The previous year, Adolph Zukor had formed Famous Players in Famous Plays. It was later known as Famous Players-Lasky and then Paramount Pictures, one of the first American feature film companies.
Pickford left the stage to join Zukor's roster of stars. Zukor believed film's potential lay in recording theatrical players in replicas of their most famous stage roles and productions. Zukor first filmed Pickford in a silent version of "A Good Little Devil". The film, produced in 1913, showed the play's Broadway actors reciting every line of dialogue, resulting in a stiff film that Pickford later called "one of the worst [features] I ever made ... it was deadly". Zukor agreed; he held the film back from distribution for a year.

Pickford's work in material written for the camera by that time had attracted a strong following. Comedy-dramas, such as "In the Bishop's Carriage" (1913), "Caprice" (1913), and especially "Hearts Adrift" (1914), made her irresistible to moviegoers. "Hearts Adrift" was so popular that Pickford asked for the first of her many publicized pay raises based on the profits and reviews. The film marked the first time Pickford’s name was featured above the title on movie marquees. "Tess of the Storm Country" was released five weeks later. Biographer Kevin Brownlow observed that the film "sent her career into orbit and made her the most popular actress in America, if not the world".

Her appeal was summed up two years later by the February 1916 issue of "Photoplay" as "luminous tenderness in a steel band of gutter ferocity". Only Charlie Chaplin, who reportedly slightly surpassed Pickford's popularity in 1916, had a similarly spellbinding pull with critics and the audience. Each enjoyed a level of fame far exceeding that of other actors. Throughout the 1910s and 1920s, Pickford was believed to be the most famous woman in the world, or, as a silent-film journalist described her, "the best known woman who has ever lived, the woman who was known to more people and loved by more people than any other woman that has been in all history".

 Pickford starred in 52 features throughout her career. On June 24, 1916, Pickford signed a new contract with Zukor that granted her full authority over production of the films in which she starred, and a record-breaking salary of $10,000 a week. In addition, Pickford's compensation was half of a film's profits, with a guarantee of $1,040,000 (US$ in 2018). Occasionally, she played a child, in films such as "The Poor Little Rich Girl" (1917), "Rebecca of Sunnybrook Farm" (1917), "Daddy-Long-Legs" (1919) and "Pollyanna" (1920). Pickford's fans were devoted to these "little girl" roles, but they were not typical of her career.

In August 1918, Pickford's contract expired and, when refusing Zukor's terms for a renewal, she was offered $250,000 to leave the motion picture business. She declined, and went to First National Pictures, which agreed to her terms. In 1919, Pickford, along with D.W. Griffith, Charlie Chaplin, and Douglas Fairbanks, formed the independent film production company United Artists. Through United Artists, Pickford continued to produce and perform in her own movies; she could also distribute them as she chose. In 1920, Pickford's film "Pollyanna" grossed around $1,100,000. The following year, Pickford's film "Little Lord Fauntleroy" was also a success, and in 1923, "Rosita" grossed over $1,000,000 as well. During this period, she also made "Little Annie Rooney" (1925), another film in which Pickford played a child, "Sparrows" (1926), which blended the Dickensian with newly minted German expressionist style, and "My Best Girl" (1927), a romantic comedy featuring her future husband Buddy Rogers.

The arrival of sound was her undoing. Pickford underestimated the value of adding sound to movies, claiming that "adding sound to movies would be like putting lipstick on the Venus de Milo".

She played a reckless socialite in "Coquette" (1929), a role for which her famous ringlets were cut into a 1920s' bob. Pickford had already cut her hair in the wake of her mother's death in 1928. Fans were shocked at the transformation. Pickford's hair had become a symbol of female virtue, and when she cut it, the act made front-page news in "The New York Times" and other papers. "Coquette" was a success and won her an Academy Award for Best Actress, although this was highly controversial. The public failed to respond to her in the more sophisticated roles. Like most movie stars of the silent era, Pickford found her career fading as talkies became more popular among audiences.

Her next film, "The Taming of The Shrew", made with husband Douglas Fairbanks, was not well received at the box office. Established Hollywood actors were panicked by the impending arrival of the talkies. On March 29, 1928, "The Dodge Brothers Hour" was broadcast from Pickford's bungalow, featuring Fairbanks, Chaplin, Norma Talmadge, Gloria Swanson, John Barrymore, D.W. Griffith, and Dolores del Rio, among others. They spoke on the radio show to prove that they could meet the challenge of talking movies.

A transition in the roles Pickford selected came when she was in her late 30s, no longer able to play the children, teenage spitfires, and feisty young women so adored by her fans, and was not suited for the glamorous and vampish heroines of early sound. In 1933, she underwent a Technicolor screen test for an animated/live action film version of "Alice in Wonderland", but Walt Disney discarded the project when Paramount released its own version of the book. Only one Technicolor still of her screen test still exists. She retired from acting in 1933; her last acting film was released in 1934. She continued to produce for others, however, including "Sleep, My Love" (1948; with Claudette Colbert) and "Love Happy" (1949), with the Marx Brothers).

Pickford used her stature in the movie industry to promote a variety of causes. Although her image depicted fragility and innocence, Pickford proved to be a worthy businesswoman who took control of her career in a cutthroat industry.

During World War I, she promoted the sale of Liberty Bonds, making an intensive series of fund-raising speeches that kicked off in Washington, D.C., where she sold bonds alongside Charles Chaplin, Douglas Fairbanks, Theda Bara, and Marie Dressler. Five days later she spoke on Wall Street to an estimated 50,000 people. Though Canadian-born, she was a powerful symbol of Americana, kissing the American flag for cameras and auctioning one of her world-famous curls for $15,000. In a single speech in Chicago she sold an estimated five million dollars' worth of bonds. She was christened the U.S. Navy's official "Little Sister"; the Army named two cannons after her and made her an honorary colonel.

At the end of World War I, Pickford conceived of the Motion Picture Relief Fund, an organization to help financially needy actors. Leftover funds from her work selling Liberty Bonds were put toward its creation, and in 1921, the Motion Picture Relief Fund (MPRF) was officially incorporated, with Joseph Schenck voted its first president and Pickford its vice president. In 1932, Pickford spearheaded the "Payroll Pledge Program", a payroll-deduction plan for studio workers who gave one half of one percent of their earnings to the MPRF. As a result, in 1940, the Fund was able to purchase land and build the Motion Picture Country House and Hospital, in Woodland Hills, California.

An astute businesswoman, Pickford became her own producer within three years of her start in features. According to her Foundation, "she oversaw every aspect of the making of her films, from hiring talent and crew to overseeing the script, the shooting, the editing, to the final release and promotion of each project". She demanded (and received) these powers in 1916, when she was under contract to Zukor's Famous Players In Famous Plays (later Paramount). Zukor acquiesced to her refusal to participate in block-booking, the widespread practice of forcing an exhibitor to show a bad film of the studio's choosing to also be able to show a Pickford film. In 1916, Pickford's films were distributed, singly, through a special distribution unit called Artcraft. The Mary Pickford Corporation was briefly Pickford's motion-picture production company.
In 1919, she increased her power by co-founding United Artists (UA) with Charlie Chaplin, D. W. Griffith, and her soon-to-be husband, Douglas Fairbanks. Before UA's creation, Hollywood studios were vertically integrated, not only producing films but forming chains of theaters. Distributors (also part of the studios) arranged for company productions to be shown in the company's movie venues. Filmmakers relied on the studios for bookings; in return they put up with what many considered creative interference.

United Artists broke from this tradition. It was solely a distribution company, offering independent film producers access to its own screens as well as the rental of temporarily unbooked cinemas owned by other companies. Pickford and Fairbanks produced and shot their films after 1920 at the jointly owned Pickford-Fairbanks studio on Santa Monica Boulevard. The producers who signed with UA were true independents, producing, creating and controlling their work to an unprecedented degree. As a co-founder, as well as the producer and star of her own films, Pickford became the most powerful woman who has ever worked in Hollywood. By 1930, Pickford's acting career had largely faded. After retiring three years later, however, she continued to produce films for United Artists. She and Chaplin remained partners in the company for decades. Chaplin left the company in 1955, and Pickford followed suit in 1956, selling her remaining shares for three million dollars.

Pickford was married three times. She married Owen Moore, an Irish-born silent film actor, on January 7, 1911. It is rumored she became pregnant by Moore in the early 1910s and had a miscarriage or an abortion. Some accounts suggest this resulted in her later inability to have children. The couple had numerous marital problems, notably Moore's alcoholism, insecurity about living in the shadow of Pickford's fame, and bouts of domestic violence. The couple lived together on-and-off for several years.

Pickford became secretly involved in a relationship with Douglas Fairbanks. They toured the U.S. together in 1918 to promote Liberty Bond sales for the World War I effort. Around this time, Pickford also suffered from the flu during the 1918 flu pandemic. Pickford divorced Moore on March 2, 1920, after she agreed to his $100,000 demand for a settlement. She married Fairbanks just days later on March 28, 1920. They went to Europe for their honeymoon; fans in London and in Paris caused riots trying to get to the famous couple. The couple's triumphant return to Hollywood was witnessed by vast crowds who turned out to hail them at railway stations across the United States.

"The Mark of Zorro" (1920) and a series of other swashbucklers gave the popular Fairbanks a more romantic, heroic image. Pickford continued to epitomize the virtuous but fiery girl next door. Even at private parties, people instinctively stood up when Pickford entered a room; she and her husband were often referred to as "Hollywood royalty". Their international reputations were broad. Foreign heads of state and dignitaries who visited the White House often asked if they could also visit Pickfair, the couple's mansion in Beverly Hills.

Dinners at Pickfair included a number of notable guests. Charlie Chaplin, Fairbanks' best friend, was often present. Other guests included George Bernard Shaw, Albert Einstein, Elinor Glyn, Helen Keller, H. G. Wells, Lord Mountbatten, Fritz Kreisler, Amelia Earhart, F. Scott Fitzgerald, Noël Coward, Max Reinhardt, Baron Nishi, Vladimir Nemirovich-Danchenko, Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, Austen Chamberlain, Sir Harry Lauder, and Meher Baba, among others. The public nature of Pickford's second marriage strained it to the breaking point. Both she and Fairbanks had little time off from producing and acting in their films. They were also constantly on display as America's unofficial ambassadors to the world, leading parades, cutting ribbons, and making speeches. When their film careers both began to flounder at the end of the silent era, Fairbanks' restless nature prompted him to overseas travel (something which Pickford did not enjoy). When Fairbanks' romance with Sylvia, Lady Ashley became public in the early 1930s, he and Pickford separated. They divorced January 10, 1936. Fairbanks' son by his first wife, Douglas Fairbanks Jr., claimed his father and Pickford long regretted their inability to reconcile.

On June 24, 1937, Pickford married her third and last husband, actor and band leader Buddy Rogers. They adopted two children: Roxanne (born 1944, adopted 1944) and Ronald Charles (born 1937, adopted 1943, a.k.a. Ronnie Pickford Rogers). As a PBS "American Experience" documentary noted, Pickford's relationship with her children was tense. She criticized their physical imperfections, including Ronnie's small stature and Roxanne's crooked teeth. Both children later said their mother was too self-absorbed to provide real maternal love. In 2003, Ronnie recalled that "Things didn't work out that much, you know. But I'll never forget her. I think that she was a good woman."

After retiring from the screen, Pickford became an alcoholic, as her father had been. Her mother Charlotte died of breast cancer in March 1928. Her siblings, Lottie and Jack, both died of alcohol-related causes. These deaths, her divorce from Fairbanks, and the end of silent films left Pickford deeply depressed. Her relationship with her children, Roxanne and Ronald, was turbulent at best. Pickford withdrew and gradually became a recluse, remaining almost entirely at Pickfair and allowing visits only from Lillian Gish, her stepson Douglas Fairbanks, Jr., and few other people. She appeared in court in 1959, in a matter pertaining to her co-ownership of North Carolina TV station WSJS-TV. The court date coincided with the date of her 67th birthday; under oath, when asked to give her age, Pickford replied: "I'm 21, going on 20."

In the mid-1960s, Pickford often received visitors only by telephone, speaking to them from her bedroom. Buddy Rogers often gave guests tours of Pickfair, including views of a genuine western bar Pickford had bought for Douglas Fairbanks, and a portrait of Pickford in the drawing room. A print of this image now hangs in the Library of Congress. In addition to her Oscar as best actress for "Coquette" (1929), Mary Pickford received an Academy Honorary Award in 1976 for lifetime achievement. The Academy sent a TV crew to her house to record her short statement of thanks – offering the public a very rare glimpse into Pickfair Manor.

Pickford had become an American citizen upon her marriage to Fairbanks in 1920. Toward the end of her life, Pickford made arrangements with the Department of Citizenship to regain her Canadian citizenship because she wished to "die as a Canadian". Her request was approved and she became a dual Canadian-American citizen.

On May 29, 1979, Pickford died at a Santa Monica, California, hospital of complications from a cerebral hemorrhage she had suffered the week before. She was interred in the Garden of Memory of the Forest Lawn Memorial Park cemetery in Glendale, California.







</doc>
<doc id="72336" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72336" title="Barbra Streisand">
Barbra Streisand

Barbara Joan "Barbra" Streisand (; born April 24, 1942) is an American singer, songwriter, actress, and filmmaker. In a career spanning six decades, she has achieved success in multiple fields of entertainment and has been recognized with two Academy Awards, ten Grammy Awards including the Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award and the Grammy Legend Award, five Emmy Awards including one Daytime Emmy, a Special Tony Award, an American Film Institute award, a Kennedy Center Honors prize, four Peabody Awards, the Presidential Medal of Freedom, and nine Golden Globes. She is among a small group of entertainers who have been honored with an Emmy, Grammy, Oscar, and Tony Award, and is one of only two artists in that group who have also won a Peabody.

Streisand is one of the best-selling recording artists of all time, with more than 68.5 million albums in the U.S. and with a total of 150 million albums and singles sold worldwide making her the best-selling female artist among top-selling artists recognized by the Recording Industry Association of America.

After beginning a successful recording career in the 1960s, Streisand ventured into film by the end of that decade. She starred in the critically acclaimed "Funny Girl", for which she won the Academy Award and Golden Globe Award for Best Actress. Her other films include "The Owl and the Pussycat", "The Way We Were", and "A Star Is Born", for which she received her second Academy Award, composing music for the love theme "Evergreen", the first woman to be honored as a composer. With the release of "Yentl" in 1983, Streisand became the first woman to write, produce, direct, and star in a major studio film. The film won an Oscar for Best Score and a Golden Globe for Best Motion Picture Musical; Streisand received the Golden Globe Award for Best Director, the first (and to date only) woman to win that award.

The RIAA and "Billboard" recognize Streisand as holding the record for the most top 10 albums of any female recording artist: a total of 34 since 1963. According to "Billboard", Streisand holds the record for the female with the most number one albums (11). "Billboard" also recognizes Streisand as the greatest female of all time on its "Billboard" 200 chart and one of the greatest artists of all time on its Hot 100 chart. Streisand is the only recording artist to have a number-one album in each of the last six decades, having released 53 gold albums, 31 platinum albums, and 14 multi-platinum albums in the United States.

Barbara Joan Streisand was born on April 24, 1942, in Brooklyn, New York, the daughter of Diana (born Ida Rosen) and Emanuel Streisand. Her mother had been a soprano singer in her youth and considered a career in music, but later became a school secretary. Her father was a high school teacher at the same school, where they first met. Streisand's family was Jewish; her paternal grandparents emigrated from Galicia (Poland–Ukraine) and her maternal grandparents from the Russian Empire, where her grandfather had been a cantor.

Her father earned a master's degree from City College of New York in 1928 and was considered athletic and handsome. As a student, he spent his summers outdoors, once working as a lifeguard and another hitchhiking through Canada. "He'd try anything," his sister Molly said. "He wasn't afraid of anything." He married Ida in 1930, two years after graduating, and became a highly respected educator with a focus on helping underprivileged and delinquent youth.

In August 1943, a few months after Streisand's first birthday, her father died suddenly at age 34 from complications from an epileptic seizure, possibly the result of a head injury years earlier. The family fell into near-poverty, with her mother working as a low-paid bookkeeper. As an adult, Streisand remembered those early years as always feeling like an "outcast," explaining, "Everybody else's father came home from work at the end of the day. Mine didn't." Her mother tried to pay their bills but could not give her daughter the attention she craved: "When I wanted love from my mother, she gave me food," Streisand says.

Streisand recalls that her mother had a "great voice" and sang semi-professionally on occasion, in her operatic soprano voice. During a visit to the Catskills when Streisand was thirteen, she told Rosie O'Donnell, she and her mother recorded some songs on tape. That session was the first time Streisand ever asserted herself as an artist, which also became her "first moment of inspiration" as an artist.

She has an older brother, Sheldon, and a half-sister, the singer Roslyn Kind, from her mother's remarriage to Louis Kind in 1949. Roslyn is nine years younger than Streisand.

Streisand began her education at the Jewish Orthodox Yeshiva of Brooklyn when she was five. There, she was considered to be bright and extremely inquisitive about everything; however, she lacked discipline, often shouting answers to questions out of turn. She next entered Public School 89 in Brooklyn, and during those early school years began watching television and going to movies. Watching the glamorous stars on the screen, she was soon entranced by acting and now hoped someday to become an actress, partly as a means of escape: "I always wanted to be somebody, to be famous . . .You know, get out of Brooklyn.

Streisand became known by others in the neighborhood for her voice. With the other kids she remembers sitting on the stoop in front of their flat and singing: "I was considered the girl on the block with the good voice." That talent became a way for her to gain attention. She would often practice her singing in the hallway of her apartment building which gave her voice an echoing quality.

She made her singing debut at a PTA assembly, where she became a hit to everyone but her mother, who was mostly critical of her daughter. Young Streisand was invited to sing at weddings and summer camp, along with having an unsuccessful audition at MGM records when she was nine. By the time she was thirteen, her mother began supporting her talent, helping her make a four-song demo tape, including "Zing! Went the Strings of My Heart," and "You'll Never Know."

Although she knew her voice was good and she liked the attention, becoming an actress was her main objective. That desire was made stronger when she saw her first Broadway play, "The Diary of Anne Frank," when she was fourteen. The star in the play was Susan Strasberg, whose acting she wanted to emulate if ever given the chance. To help achieve that goal, Streisand began spending her spare time in the library, studying the biographies of various stage actresses such as Eleanora Duse and Sarah Bernhardt. In addition, she began reading novels and plays, including some by Shakespeare and Ibsen, and also on her own, studied the acting theories of Konstantin Stanislavski and Michael Chekhov.

She attended Erasmus Hall High School in Brooklyn in 1955 where she became an honor student in modern history, English, and Spanish. She also joined the Freshman Chorus and Choral Club, where she sang with another choir member and classmate, Neil Diamond. Diamond recalls, "We were two poor kids in Brooklyn. We hung out in the front of Erasmus High and smoked cigarettes." The school was near an art-movie house, and he recalls that she was always aware of the films they were showing, while he wasn't as interested.

During the summer of 1957 she got her first stage experience as a walk-on at the Playhouse in Malden Bridge, New York. That small part was followed by a role as the kid sister in "Picnic" and one as a vamp in "Desk Set." She returned to school in Brooklyn but never took dramatic arts classes, preferring instead to gain some real-world stage experience. To that end, in her sophomore year, she took a night job at the Cherry Lane Theatre in Greenwich Village helping backstage. When she was a senior, she rehearsed for a small part in "Driftwood", a play staged in a midtown attic space. Her co-star in "Driftwood" was Joan Rivers.

At age sixteen, she graduated from Erasmus Hall in January 1959, and despite her mother's pleas that she stay out of show business, she immediately set out trying to get roles on the New York City stage. After renting a small apartment on 48th street, in the heart of the theater district, she accepted any job she could involving the stage, and at every opportunity, she "made the rounds" of the casting offices.

At sixteen, then living on her own, Streisand's youth and ambition worked in her favor, but she lacked a mature woman's physical features which were needed for serious female roles. She therefore took various menial jobs to have some income. At one period, she lacked a permanent address, and found herself sleeping at the home of friends or anywhere else she could set up the army cot she carried around to save on rent expense. When desperate, she would return to her mother's flat in Brooklyn for a home-cooked meal. However, her mother would be horrified by her daughter's "gypsy-like lifestyle," wrote biographer Karen Swenson, and again begged her to give up trying to get into show business; but Streisand took her mother's pleadings as even more reason to keep trying: "My desires were strengthened by wanting to prove to my mother that I "could" be a star."

She took a job as an usher at the Lunt-Fontanne Theater for "The Sound of Music", early in 1960. During the run of the play, she heard that the casting director was auditioning for more singers, and it marked the first time she sang in pursuit of a job. Although the director felt she was not right for the part, he encouraged her to begin including her talent as a singer on her résumé when looking for other work.

That suggestion prodded Streisand to think seriously about a singing career, in addition to acting. She asked her boyfriend, Barry Dennen, to tape her singing, copies of which she could then give out to possible employers. Dennen had acted with her briefly in an off-Broadway play, but had no reason to think she had any talent as a singer, and she never mentioned it. Nevertheless, he agreed and found a guitarist to accompany her:

Dennen grew enthusiastic and he convinced her to enter a talent contest at the Lion, a gay nightclub in Manhattan's Greenwich Village. She performed two songs, after which there was a "stunned silence" from the audience, followed by "thunderous applause" when she was pronounced the winner. She was invited back and sang at the club for several weeks. It was during this time that she dropped the second "a" from her first name, switching from "Barbara" to "Barbra", due to her dislike of her original name.

Streisand was next asked to audition at the Bon Soir nightclub, after which she was signed up at $125 a week. It became her first professional engagement, in September 1960, where she was the opening act for comedian Phyllis Diller. She recalls it was the first time she had been in that kind of upscale environment: "I'd never been in a nightclub until I sang in one."

Dennen now wanted to expose Streisand to his vast record collection of female singers, including Billie Holiday, Mabel Mercer, Ethel Waters, and Édith Piaf. His effort made a difference in her developing style as she gained new respect for the art of popular singing. She also realized she could still become an actress by first gaining recognition as a singer. According to biographer Christopher Nickens, hearing other great female singers benefited her style, as she began creating different emotional characters when performing, which gave her singing a greater range.

Feeling more self-confident, she improved her stage presence when speaking to the audience between songs. She discovered that her Brooklyn-bred style of humor was received quite favorably. During the next six months appearing at the club, some began comparing her singing voice to famous names such as Judy Garland, Lena Horne and Fanny Brice. Her conversational ability to charm an audience with spontaneous humor during performances became more sophisticated and professional. Theater critic Leonard Harris, in one of his reviews, could already envision her future success: "She's twenty; by the time she's thirty she will have rewritten the record books."

Streisand never lost her desire to be a stage actress and accepted her first role on the New York stage in "Another Evening with Harry Stoones", a satirical comedy play in which she acted and sang two solos. The show received terrible reviews and closed the next day. With the help of her new personal manager, Martin Erlichman, she had successful shows in Detroit and St. Louis. Erlichman then booked her at an even more upscale nightclub in Manhattan, Blue Angel, where she became a bigger hit during the period of 1961 to 1962. Streisand once told Jimmy Fallon, whom she sang a duet with, on the "Tonight Show", that Erlichman was a "fantastic manager" and still managed her career after 50 years.

While appearing at Blue Angel, theater director and playwright Arthur Laurents asked her to audition for a new musical comedy he was directing, "I Can Get It for You Wholesale". She got the part of secretary to the lead actor businessman, played by then unknown Elliott Gould. They fell in love during rehearsals and eventually moved into a small apartment together. The show opened on March 22, 1962, at the Shubert Theater, and received rave reviews. Her performance "stopped the show cold," wrote Nickens, and she became Broadway's most exciting and youngest new star. Groucho Marx, while hosting the "Tonight Show", told her that twenty was an "extremely young age to be a success on Broadway." Streisand received a Tony nomination and New York Drama Critic's prize for Best Supporting Actress. The show was recorded and it was the first time the public could purchase an album of her singing.

Streisand's first television appearance was on "The Tonight Show", then credited to its usual host Jack Paar. She was seen during an April 1961 episode on which Orson Bean substituted for Paar. She sang Harold Arlen's "A Sleepin' Bee". During her appearance, Phyllis Diller, also a guest on the show, called her "one of the great singing talents in the world."

Later in 1961, before she was cast in "Another Evening With Harry Stoones", she became a semi-regular on "PM East/PM West", a talk/variety series hosted by Mike Wallace and Joyce Davidson.

In May 1962, Streisand appeared on "The Garry Moore Show" where she sang "Happy Days Are Here Again" for the first time. Her sad, slow version of the 1930s upbeat Democratic Party theme song became her signature song during this early phase of her career.

Johnny Carson had her on the "Tonight Show" half a dozen times in 1962 and 1963, and she became a favorite of his television audience and himself personally. He described her as an "exciting new singer." During one show, she joked with Groucho Marx who liked her style of humor.
In December 1962, she made the first of a number of appearances on the Ed Sullivan Show. She was later a cohost on the Mike Douglas Show, and also made an impact on a number of Bob Hope specials. Performing with her on the Ed Sullivan Show was Liberace who became an instant fan of the young singer. Liberace invited her to Las Vegas, Nevada, to perform as his opening act at the Riviera Hotel. Liberace is credited with introducing Barbra to Western American audiences. The following September during her ongoing shows at Harrah's Hotel in Lake Tahoe, she and Elliott Gould took time off to get married in Carson City, Nevada. With her career and popularity rising so quickly, she saw her marriage to Gould as a "stabilizing influence."

Her first album, "The Barbra Streisand Album" in early 1963, made the top 10 on the "Billboard" chart and won three Grammy Awards. The album made her the best-selling female vocalist in the country. That summer she also released "The Second Barbra Streisand Album", which established her as the "most exciting new personality since Elvis Presley." She ended that breakthrough year of 1963 by performing one-night concerts in Indianapolis, San Jose, Chicago, Sacramento, and Los Angeles.

Streisand returned to Broadway in 1964 with an acclaimed performance as entertainer Fanny Brice in "Funny Girl" at the Winter Garden Theatre. The show introduced two of her signature songs, "People" and "Don't Rain on My Parade." Because of the play's overnight success, she appeared on the cover of "Time". In 1964 Streisand was nominated for a Tony Award for Best Leading Actress in a Musical but lost to Carol Channing in "Hello, Dolly!" Streisand received an honorary "Star of the Decade" Tony Award in 1970.

In 1966, she repeated her success with "Funny Girl" in London's West End at the Prince of Wales Theatre. From 1965 to 1968 she appeared in her first four solo television specials.

Streisand has recorded 50 studio albums, almost all with Columbia Records. Her early works in the 1960s (her debut "The Barbra Streisand Album", "The Second Barbra Streisand Album", "The Third Album", "My Name Is Barbra", etc.) are considered classic renditions of theatre and cabaret standards, including her pensive version of the normally uptempo "Happy Days Are Here Again". She performed this in a duet with Judy Garland on "The Judy Garland Show". Garland referred to her on the air as one of the last great belters. They also sang "There's No Business Like Show Business" with Ethel Merman joining them.
Beginning with "My Name Is Barbra", her early albums were often medley-filled keepsakes of her television specials. Starting in 1969, she began attempting more contemporary material, but like many talented singers of the day, she found herself out of her element with rock. Her vocal talents prevailed, and she gained newfound success with the pop and ballad-oriented Richard Perry-produced album "Stoney End" in 1971. The title track, written by Laura Nyro, was a major hit for Streisand.

During the 1970s, she was also highly prominent on the pop charts, with Top 10 recordings such as "The Way We Were" (US No. 1), "Evergreen (Love Theme from A Star Is Born)" (US No. 1), "No More Tears (Enough Is Enough)" (1979, with Donna Summer), which as of 2010 is reportedly still the most commercially successful duet, (US No. 1), "You Don't Bring Me Flowers" (with Neil Diamond) (US No. 1) and "The Main Event" (US No. 3), some of which came from soundtrack recordings of her films. As the 1970s ended, Streisand was named the most successful female singer in the U.S. — only Elvis Presley and The Beatles had sold more albums. In 1980, she released her best-selling effort to date, the Barry Gibb-produced "Guilty". The album contained the hits "Woman in Love" (which spent several weeks on top of the pop charts in the fall of 1980), "Guilty", and "What Kind of Fool".

After years of largely ignoring Broadway and traditional pop music in favor of more contemporary material, Streisand returned to her musical-theater roots with 1985's "The Broadway Album", which was unexpectedly successful, holding the coveted No. 1 Billboard position for three straight weeks, and being certified quadruple platinum. The album featured tunes by Rodgers and Hammerstein, George Gershwin, Jerome Kern, and Stephen Sondheim, who was persuaded to rework some of his songs especially for this recording. "The Broadway Album" was met with acclaim, including a Grammy nomination for album of the year and handed Streisand her eighth Grammy as Best Female Vocalist. After releasing the live album "One Voice" in 1986, Streisand was set to release another album of Broadway songs in 1988. She recorded several cuts for the album under the direction of Rupert Holmes, including "On My Own" (from "Les Misérables"), a medley of "How Are Things in Glocca Morra?" and "Heather on the Hill" (from "Finian's Rainbow" and "Brigadoon", respectively), "All I Ask of You" (from "The Phantom of the Opera"), "Warm All Over" (from "The Most Happy Fella") and an unusual solo version of "Make Our Garden Grow" (from "Candide"). Streisand was not happy with the direction of the project and it was scrapped. Only "Warm All Over" and a reworked, lite FM-friendly version of "All I Ask of You" were ever released, the latter appearing on Streisand's 1988 effort, "Till I Loved You". At the beginning of the 1990s, Streisand started focusing on her film directorial efforts and became almost inactive in the recording studio. In 1991, a four-disc box set, "Just for the Record", was released. A compilation spanning Streisand's entire career to date, it featured over 70 tracks of live performances, greatest hits, rarities and previously unreleased material.
The following year, Streisand's concert fundraising events helped propel President Bill Clinton into the spotlight and into office. Streisand later introduced Clinton at his inauguration in 1993. Streisand's music career, however, was largely on hold. A 1992 appearance at an APLA benefit as well as the aforementioned inaugural performance hinted that Streisand was becoming more receptive to the idea of live performances. A tour was suggested, though Streisand would not immediately commit to it, citing her well-known stage fright as well as security concerns. During this time, Streisand finally returned to the recording studio and released "Back to Broadway" in June 1993. The album was not as universally lauded as its predecessor, but it did debut at No. 1 on the pop charts (a rare feat for an artist of Streisand's age, especially given that it relegated Janet Jackson's "Janet" to the No. 2 spot). One of the album's highlights was a medley of "I Have A Love" / "One Hand, One Heart", a duet with Johnny Mathis, who Streisand said is one of her favorite singers.

In 1993, "The New York Times" music critic Stephen Holden wrote that Streisand "enjoys a cultural status that only one other American entertainer, Frank Sinatra, has achieved in the last half century". In September 1993, Streisand announced her first public concert appearances in 27 years (if one does not count her Las Vegas nightclub performances between 1969 and 1972). What began as a two-night New Year's event at the MGM Grand Las Vegas led to a multi-city tour in the summer of 1994. Tickets for the tour were sold out in under an hour. Streisand also appeared on the covers of major magazines in anticipation of what "Time magazine" named "The Music Event of the Century". The tour was one of the biggest all-media merchandise parlays in history. Ticket prices ranged from US$50 to US$1,500, making Streisand the highest-paid concert performer in history. "Barbra Streisand: The Concert" went on to be the top-grossing concert of the year and earned five Emmy Awards and the Peabody Award, while the taped broadcast on HBO was the highest-rated concert special in HBO's 30-year history. Following the tour's conclusion, Streisand once again kept a low profile musically, instead focusing her efforts on acting and directing duties as well as a burgeoning romance with actor James Brolin.

In 1996, Streisand released "I Finally Found Someone" as a duet with Canadian singer and songwriter Bryan Adams. The song was nominated for an Oscar as it was part of the soundtrack of Streisand's self-directed movie "The Mirror Has Two Faces". It reached #8 on the Billboard Hot 100, and was her first significant hit in almost a decade and her first top 10 hit on the Hot 100 (and first gold single) since 1981.

In 1997, she finally returned to the recording studio, releasing "Higher Ground", a collection of songs of a loosely inspirational nature which also featured a duet with Céline Dion. The album received generally favorable reviews and once again debuted at No. 1 on the pop charts. Following her marriage to Brolin in 1998, Streisand recorded an album of love songs entitled "A Love Like Ours" the following year. Reviews were mixed, with many critics complaining about the somewhat syrupy sentiments and overly-lush arrangements; however, it did produce a modest hit for Streisand in the country-tinged "If You Ever Leave Me", a duet with Vince Gill.

On New Year's Eve 1999, Streisand returned to the concert stage, selling out in the first few hours, eight months before her return. At the end of the millennium, she was the number one female singer in the U.S., with at least two No. 1 albums in each decade since she began performing. A two-disc live album of the concert entitled "" was released in 2000. Streisand performed versions of the "Timeless" concert in Sydney and Melbourne, Australia, in early 2000. In advance of four concerts (two each in Los Angeles and New York) in September 2000, Streisand announced that she was retiring from playing public concerts. Her performance of the song "People" was broadcast on the Internet via America Online.

Streisand's most recent albums have been "Christmas Memories" (2001), a somewhat somber collection of holiday songs, and "The Movie Album" (2003), featuring famous film themes and backed by a large symphony orchestra. "Guilty Pleasures" (called "Guilty Too" in the UK), a collaboration with Barry Gibb and a sequel to their "Guilty", was released worldwide in 2005.
In February 2006, Streisand recorded the song "Smile" alongside Tony Bennett at Streisand's Malibu home. The song is included on Bennett's 80th birthday album, "Duets". In September 2006, the pair filmed a live performance of the song for a special directed by Rob Marshall entitled "Tony Bennett: An American Classic". The special aired on NBC November 21, 2006, and was released on DVD the same day. Streisand's duet with Bennett opened the special. In 2006, Streisand announced her intent to tour again, in an effort to raise money and awareness for multiple issues. After four days of rehearsal at the Sovereign Bank Arena in Trenton, New Jersey, the tour began on October 4 at the Wachovia Center in Philadelphia, continued with a featured stop in Fort Lauderdale, Florida, (this was the concert Streisand chose to film for a TV special), and concluded at Staples Center in Los Angeles on November 20, 2006. Special guests Il Divo were interwoven throughout the show. The show was known as "".

Streisand's 20-concert tour set box-office records. At the age of 64, she grossed $92,457,062 and set house gross records in 14 of the 16 arenas played on the tour. She set the third-place record for her show of October 9, 2006 at Madison Square Garden, the first- and second-place records, of which are held by her two shows in September 2000. She set the second-place record at MGM Grand Garden Arena with her December 31, 1999, show being the house record and highest-grossing concert of all time. This led many people to openly criticize Streisand for price gouging as many tickets sold for upwards of $1,000.

A collection of performances culled from different stops on this tour, "Live in Concert 2006", debuted at No. 7 on the "Billboard" 200, making it Streisand's 29th Top 10 album. In the summer of 2007, Streisand gave concerts for the first time in continental Europe. The first concert took place in Zürich (June 18), then Vienna (June 22), Paris (June 26), Berlin (June 30), Stockholm (July 4, canceled), Manchester (July 10) and Celbridge, near Dublin (July 14), followed by three concerts in London (July 18, 22 and 25), the only European city where Streisand had performed before 2007. Tickets for the London dates cost between £100.00 and £1,500.00, and for Ireland, between €118 and €500. The Ireland date was marred by issues with serious parking and seating problems leading to the event's being dubbed a fiasco by "Hot Press". The tour included a 58-piece orchestra.

In February 2008, "Forbes" listed Streisand as the No.-2-earning female musician between June 2006 and June 2007 with earnings of about $60 million. On November 17, 2008, Streisand returned to the studio to begin recording what would be her sixty-third album and it was announced that Diana Krall was producing the album. Streisand is one of the recipients of the 2008 Kennedy Center Honors. On December 7, 2008, she visited the White House as part of the ceremonies.

On April 25, 2009, CBS aired Streisand's latest television special, "Streisand: Live in Concert", highlighting the featured stop from her 2006 North American tour in Fort Lauderdale, Florida. On September 26, 2009, Streisand performed a one-night-only show at the Village Vanguard in New York City's Greenwich Village. This performance was later released on DVD as "." On September 29, 2009, Streisand and Columbia Records released her newest studio album, "Love is the Answer", produced by Diana Krall. On October 2, 2009, Streisand made her British television performance debut with an interview on "Friday Night with Jonathan Ross" to promote the album. This album debuted at No. 1 on the Billboard 200 and registered her biggest weekly sales since 1997, making Streisand the only artist in history to achieve No. 1 albums in five different decades.

On February 1, 2010, Streisand joined over eighty other artists in recording a new version of the 1985 charity single "We Are the World". Quincy Jones and Lionel Richie planned to release the new version to mark the 25th anniversary of its original recording. These plans changed, however, in view of the devastating earthquake that hit Haiti on January 12, 2010, and on February 12, the song, now called "We Are the World 25 for Haiti", made its debut as a charity single to support relief aid for the island nation.

In 2011, Streisand sang "Somewhere" from the Broadway musical "West Side Story", with child prodigy Jackie Evancho, on Evancho's album "Dream with Me".

Streisand was honored as MusiCares Person of the Year on February 11, 2011, two days prior to the 53rd Annual Grammy Awards.

On October 11, 2012, Streisand gave a three-hour concert performance before a crowd of 18,000 as part of the ongoing inaugural events of Barclays Center (and part of her current "Barbra Live" tour) in Brooklyn (her first-ever public performance in her home borough). Streisand was joined onstage by trumpeter Chris Botti, Italian operatic trio Il Volo, and her son Jason Gould. The concert included musical tributes by Streisand to Donna Summer and Marvin Hamlisch, both of whom had died earlier in 2012. Confirmed attendees included Barbara Walters, Jimmy Fallon, Sting, Katie Couric, Woody Allen, Michael Douglas and New York City mayor Michael Bloomberg, as well as designers Calvin Klein, Donna Karan, Ralph Lauren and Michael Kors. In June 2013 she gave two concerts in Bloomfield Stadium, Tel Aviv.

Streisand is one of many singers who use teleprompters during their live performances. Streisand has defended her choice in using teleprompters to display lyrics and, sometimes, banter.

In September 2014, she released "Partners", a new album of duets that features collaborations with Elvis Presley, Andrea Bocelli, Stevie Wonder, Lionel Richie, Billy Joel, Babyface, Michael Bublé, Josh Groban, John Mayer, John Legend, Blake Shelton and Jason Gould. This album topped the "Billboard" 200 with sales of 196,000 copies in the first week, making Streisand the only recording artist to have a number-one album in each of the last six decades. It was also certified gold in November 2014 and platinum in January 2015, thus becoming Streisand's 52nd gold and 31st Platinum album, more than any other female artist in history.

In May 2016, Streisand announced the upcoming album "" to be released in August following a nine-city concert tour, "", including performances in Los Angeles, Las Vegas, Philadelphia, and a return to her hometown of Brooklyn.

Her first film was a reprise of her Broadway hit, "Funny Girl" (1968), an artistic and commercial success directed by Hollywood veteran William Wyler. Streisand won the 1968 Academy Award for Best Actress for the role, sharing it with Katharine Hepburn ("The Lion in Winter"), the only time there has been a tie in this Oscar category. Her next two movies were also based on musicals, Jerry Herman's "Hello, Dolly!", directed by Gene Kelly (1969); and Alan Jay Lerner's and Burton Lane's "On a Clear Day You Can See Forever", directed by Vincente Minnelli (1970); while her fourth film was based on the Broadway play "The Owl and the Pussycat" (1970).

During the 1970s, Streisand starred in several screwball comedies, including "What's Up, Doc?" (1972) and "The Main Event" (1979), both co-starring Ryan O'Neal, and "For Pete's Sake" (1974) with Michael Sarrazin. One of her most famous roles during this period was in the drama "The Way We Were" (1973) with Robert Redford, for which she received an Academy Award nomination as Best Actress. She earned her second Academy Award for Best Original Song (with lyricist Paul Williams) for the song "Evergreen", from "A Star Is Born" in 1976, in which she also starred.

Along with Paul Newman, Sidney Poitier and later Steve McQueen, Streisand formed First Artists Production Company in 1969 so actors could secure properties and develop movie projects for themselves. Streisand's initial outing with First Artists was "Up the Sandbox" (1972).

From 1969 to 1980, Streisand appeared in Top Ten Money Making Stars Poll, the annual motion picture exhibitors poll of Top 10 Box Office attractions a total of 10 times, often as the only woman on the list. After the commercially disappointing "All Night Long" in 1981, Streisand's film output decreased considerably. She has acted in only eight films since.

Streisand produced a number of her own films, setting up Barwood Films in 1972. For "Yentl" (1983), she was producer, director, and star, an experience she repeated for "The Prince of Tides" (1991) and "The Mirror Has Two Faces" (1996). There was controversy when "Yentl" received five Academy Award nominations, but none for the major categories of Best Picture, Actress, or Director. "The Prince of Tides" received even more Oscar nominations, including Best Picture and Best Screenplay, although not for director. Upon completion of the film, its screenwriter, Pat Conroy, who also authored the novel, called Streisand "a goddess who walks upon the earth."

Streisand also scripted "Yentl", something for which she is not always given credit. According to "The New York Times" editorial page editor Andrew Rosenthal in an interview with Allan Wolper, "The one thing that makes Barbra Streisand crazy is when nobody gives her the credit for having written "Yentl"."

In 2004, Streisand made a return to film acting after an eight-year hiatus, in the comedy "Meet the Fockers" (a sequel to "Meet the Parents"), playing opposite Dustin Hoffman, Ben Stiller, Blythe Danner and Robert De Niro.
In 2005, Streisand's Barwood Films, Gary Smith, and Sonny Murray purchased the rights to Simon Mawer's book "Mendel's Dwarf". In December 2008, she stated that she was considering directing an adaptation of Larry Kramer's play "The Normal Heart", a project she has worked on since the mid-1990s.

In December 2010, Streisand appeared in "Little Fockers", the third film from the "Meet the Parents" trilogy. She reprised the role of Roz Focker alongside Dustin Hoffman.

On January 28, 2011, "The Hollywood Reporter" announced that Paramount Pictures had given the green light to begin shooting the road-trip comedy "My Mother's Curse", with Seth Rogen playing Streisand's character's son. Anne Fletcher directed the project with a script by Dan Fogelman, produced by Lorne Michaels, John Goldwyn, and Evan Goldberg. Executive producers included Streisand, Rogen, Fogelman, and David Ellison, whose Skydance Productions co-financed the road movie. Shooting began in spring 2011 and wrapped in July; the film's title was eventually altered to "The Guilt Trip", and the movie was released in December 2012.

Streisand has been set to star in a film adaptation of the musical "Gypsy" featuring music by Jules Styne, a book by Arthur Laurents and lyrics by Stephen Sondheim with Richard LaGravenese reportedly attached to the project as screenwriter. In April 2016, it was reported that Streisand was in advanced negotiations to star in and produce the film, which will be directed by Barry Levinson and distributed by STX Entertainment. Two months later, the film's script had been completed and production was scheduled to begin in early 2017.

Streisand is set to direct the historical drama "Catherine the Great", a feature biopic about the 18th-century Russian empress, based on the top 2014 Black List script, produced by Gil Netter.

Whitney Balliett wrote, "Streisand wows her listeners with her shrewd dynamics (in-your-ear soft here, elbowing-loud there), her bravura climbs, her rolling vibrato, and the singular Streisand-from-Brooklyn nasal quality of her voice — a voice as immediately recognizable in its way as Louis Armstrong's." Music writer Allegra Rossi adds that Streisand creates complete compositions in her head:

While she is predominantly a pop singer, Streisand's voice has been described as "semi-operatic" due to its strength and quality of tone. According to Adam Feldman of "Time Out", Streisand's "signature vocal style" is "a suspension bridge between old-school belting and microphone pop." She is known for her ability to hold relatively high notes, both loud and soft, with great intensity, as well as for her ability to make slight but unobtrusive embellishments on a melodic line. The former quality led classical pianist Glenn Gould to call himself "a Streisand freak".

In recent years, critics and audiences have noted that her voice has "lowered and acquired an occasionally husky edge". However, "New York Times" music critic Stephen Holden noted that her distinctive tone and musical instincts remain, and that she still "has the gift of conveying a primal human longing in a beautiful sound". Paul Taylor of "The Independent "wrote that Streisand "has sounded a little scratchy and frayed, though the stout resolve and superb technique with which Streisand manages to hoist it over these difficulties has come to seem morally as well aesthetically impressive." Reviewing Streisand's most recent studio effort "Partners", Gil Naveh of "Haaretz "described Streisand's voice as "velvety, clear and powerful … and the passing years have given it a fascinating depth and roughness."

Streisand has been married twice. Her first husband was actor Elliott Gould, to whom she was married from 1963 until 1971. They had one child, Jason Gould, who appeared as her on-screen son in "The Prince of Tides". In 1969 and 1970, Streisand dated Canadian Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau.

She started a relationship with hairdresser/producer Jon Peters in 1974. He went on to be her manager and producer. She is the godmother of his daughters, Caleigh Peters and Skye Peters.

Streisand dated tennis champion Andre Agassi in the early 1990s. Writing about the relationship in his 2009 autobiography, Agassi said: "We agree that we're good for each other, and so what if she's twenty-eight years older? We're simpatico, and the public outcry only adds spice to our connection. It makes our friendship feel forbidden, taboo – another piece of my overall rebellion. Dating Barbra Streisand is like wearing Hot Lava."

Her second husband is actor James Brolin, whom she married on July 1, 1998. While they have no children together, Brolin has two children from his first marriage, including actor Josh Brolin, and one child from his second marriage.

Streisand changed her name from "Barbara" to "Barbra" because, she said, "I hated the name, but I refused to change it." Streisand further explained, "Well, I was 18 and I wanted to be unique, but I didn't want to change my name because that was too false. You know, people were saying you could be Joanie Sands, or something like that. (My middle name is Joan.) And I said, 'No, let's see, if I take out the 'a,' it's still 'Barbara,' but it's unique." A 1967 biography with a concert program said, "the spelling of her first name is an instance of partial rebellion: she was advised to change her last name and retaliated by dropping an "a" from the first instead."

Streisand has long been an active supporter of the Democratic Party and many of its causes.

In 1971, Streisand was one of the celebrities listed on President Richard Nixon's Enemies List.

Streisand is a supporter of gay rights, and in 2007 helped raise funds in an unsuccessful attempt to defeat Proposition 8 in California.

In June 2013, she helped celebrate the 90th birthday of Shimon Peres held at Jerusalem's international convention center. She also performed at two other concerts in Tel Aviv that same week, part of her first concert tour of Israel.
In January 2017, she participated in 2017 Women's March in Los Angeles. Introduced by Rufus Wainwright, Streisand appeared on stage and made a speech.

In 1984, Streisand donated the Emanuel Streisand Building for Jewish Studies to the Hebrew University of Jerusalem, in the Mount Scopus campus, in memory of her father, an educator and scholar who died when she was young.

Streisand has personally raised $25 million for organizations through her live performances. The Streisand Foundation, established in 1986, has contributed over $16 million through nearly 1,000 grants to "national organizations working on preservation of the environment, voter education, the protection of civil liberties and civil rights, women's issues and nuclear disarmament".

In 2006, Streisand donated $1 million to the William J. Clinton Foundation in support of former President Bill Clinton's climate change initiative.

In 2009, Streisand gifted $5 million to endow the Barbra Streisand Women's Cardiovascular Research and Education Program at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center's Women's Heart Center. In September that year, "Parade" magazine included Streisand on its Giving Back Fund's second annual Giving Back 30 survey, "a ranking of the celebrities who have made the largest donations to charity in 2007 according to public records", as the third most generous celebrity. The Giving Back Fund claimed Streisand donated $11 million, which The Streisand Foundation distributed. In 2012 she raised $22 million to support her women's cardiovascular center, bringing her own personal contribution to $10 million. The program was officially named the Barbra Streisand Women's Heart Center.

At Julien's Auctions in October 2009, Streisand, a longtime collector of art and furniture, sold 526 items, with all the proceeds going to her foundation. Items included a costume from "Funny Lady" and a vintage dental cabinet purchased by the performer at 18 years old. The sale's most valuable lot was a painting by Kees van Dongen.

In December 2011, she appeared at a fundraising gala for Israel Defense Forces charities.

Streisand was presented Distinguished Merit Award by Mademoiselle in 1964, and selected as Miss Ziegfeld in 1965. In 1968, she received the Israel Freedom Medal, the highest civilian award of Israel, and she was awarded Pied Piper Award by ASCAP and Prix De L'Academie Charles Cros in 1969, Crystal Apple by her hometown City of New York, Woman of Achievement in the Arts by Anti-Defamation League in 1978. In 1984, Streisand was awarded the Women in Film Crystal Award for outstanding women who, through their endurance and the excellence of their work, have helped to expand the role of women within the entertainment industry. She received the Woman of Courage Award by the National Organization for Women (NOW), the Ordre des Arts et des Lettres and Scopus Award by American Friends of The Hebrew University.

She received Breakthrough Awards for "making films that portray women with serious complexity" at the Women, Men and Media symposium in 1991. In 1992, she was given the Commitment to Life Award by AIDS Project Los Angeles(APLA), and the Bill of Rights Award by the American Civil Liberties Union of Southern California, the Dorothy Arzner Special Recognition by Women in Film, and the Golden Plate by the Academy of Achievement. She was honored with the Harry Chapin Humanitarian Award from the ASCAP in 1994 and the Peabody Award in 1995, the same year she was accorded an Honorary Doctorate In Arts and Humanities by Brandeis University. She was also awarded Filmmaker of the Year Award for "lifetime achievement in filmmaking" by ShowEast and Peabody Award in 1996, Christopher Award in 1998.

In 2000, President Bill Clinton presented Streisand with the National Medal of Arts, the highest honor specifically given for achievement in the arts, and Library of Congress Living Legend, she also received the highest honor for a career in film AFI Life Achievement Award from American Film Institute and Liberty and Justice Award from Rainbow/PUSH Coalition, Gracie Allen Award，First Annual Jewish Image Awards in 2001, and Humanitarian Award "for her years of leadership, vision, and activism in the fight for civil liberties, including religion, race, gender equality and freedom of speech, as well as all aspects of gay rights" from Human Rights Campaign in 2004. In 2007, French President Nicolas Sarkozy presented Streisand with Legion of Honour, the highest decoration in France, and President George W. Bush presented her Kennedy Center Honors, the highest recognition of cultural achievement.

In 2011, she was given Board of Governors Humanitarian Award for her efforts on behalf of women's heart health and her many other philanthropic activities." by Cedars-Sinai Heart Institute. She received the L'Oréal Paris Legend Award in 18th "Elle" Magazine Women in Hollywood. In 2012, she received a Lifetime Achievement Award from the Women Film Critics Circle. She was accorded an Honorary Doctorate of Philosophy by the Hebrew University of Jerusalem in 2013. In that year, she was also recipient of the Charlie Chaplin Award for Lifetime Achievement by the Film Society of Lincoln Center as the only female artist to direct, write, produce and star in the same major studio film, "Yentl," along with a Lifetime Achievement Glamour Awards. In 2014, Streisand was on one of eight different "New York Magazine" covers celebrating the magazine's "100 Years, 100 Songs, 100 Nights: A Century of Pop Music in New York". She also received the American Society of Cinematographers (ASC) Board of Governors Award, the Sherry Lansing Leadership Award at The Hollywood Reporter's annual Women in Entertainment Breakfast, and came first in the 1010 Wins Iconic Celebrity Poll by CBS in 2015. In November 2015, President Barack Obama announced that Streisand would receive the Presidential Medal of Freedom, the highest civilian award of the United States.
Streisand was inducted into and Hollywood Walk of Fame in 1976, Goldmine Hall of Fama in 2002, Long Island Music Hall of Fame in 2007, the Hit Parade Hall of Fame in 2009, National Museum of American Jewish History and California Hall of Fame in 2010.

In 1970, she received a Special Tony Award named "Star of the Decade", and was selected "Star of the Decade" by the National Association of Theatre Owners (NATO) in 1980, "Star of Decade" by NATO/ShowWest and President's Award by NARM in 1988. That year she was also named as All-Time Favorite Musical Performer by People's Choice Awards. In 1986, "Life" named her as one of "Five Hollywood's Most Powerful Women". In 1998, Harris Poll reported that she is the "Most Popular Singer Among Adult Americans of All Ages." She was also featured on VH1's 100 Greatest Women of Rock N Roll, Top 100 Singers of all time by "Mojo" magazine, named the century's best female singer in a Reuters/Zogby poll, and "Top Female Artist of the Century" by Recording Industry Association of America in 1999. In 2006, Streisand was one of honorees at Oprah Winfrey's white-tie Legends Ball. In 2011, the British tabloid "The Sun" ranked Streisand as "The 50 female singers who will never be forgotten".

"The Daily Telegraph" ranked Streisand as the 10 top female singer-songwriters of all time. A&E's "Biography" magazine ranked Streisand as one of their favorite leading actress of all time, she was also featured on the Voices of the Century list by BBC, the "100 Greatest Movie Stars of Time" list compiled by "People", VH1's list of the "200 Greatest Pop Culture Icons of All Time", the "100 Greatest Entertainers of All Time"（ranked at #13） and the "Greatest Movie Star of all time list" by Entertainment Weekly, "The 50 Greatest Actresses of All Tim" by AMC, and Billboard Hot 100 All-Time Top Artists. "Billboard" also ranked Streisand as the top female Jewish musician of all time. As a gay icon, Streisand was named by "The Advocate" as one of the "25 Coolest Women" and the "9 Coolest Women Appealing to Both Lesbians and Gay Men", and was also placed among the "12 Greatest Female Gay Icons of All Time" by Out magazine. She was recognized as one of the top gay icons of the past three decades by Gay Times.

During the first decade of the 21st century, the American Film Institute celebrated 100 years of the greatest films in American cinema. Four of Streisand's songs were represented on AFI's 100 Years...100 Songs, which highlighted "America's Greatest Music in the Movies": "The Way We Were" at #8, "Evergreen (Love Theme From "A Star Is Born")" at # 16, "People" at #13, and "Don't Rain On My Parade" at #46. Many of her films were represented on AFI's 100 Years... series. AFI's 100 Years...100 Laughs, highlighting "the films and film artists that have made audiences laugh throughout the century," ranked "What's Up, Doc?" at #61. AFI's 100 Years...100 Passions highlighted the top 100 greatest love stories in American cinema and placed "The Way We Were" at #8, "Funny Girl" at #41, and "What's Up, Doc?" at #68. AFI's Greatest Movie Musicals highlighted the 25 greatest American movie musicals, ranking "Funny Girl" at #16.

In December 2016, the film "Funny Girl" was marked for preservation by the Library of Congress in the National Film Registry. In March 2017, the song "People" was selected for preservation in the National Recording Registry. Streisand said she was humbled to have the song honored "as part of the flow of our nation's culture."

As one of the most acclaimed actresses, singers, directors, writers, composers, producers, designers, photographers and activists in every medium that she's worked in, Barbra is the only artist who is concurrently a member of the American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers, Screen Actors Guild, American Federation of Television and Radio Artists, Academy of Motion Pictures Arts and Sciences and Actors' Equity Association, as well as the honorary chairwoman of the board of directors of Hadassah's International Research Institute on Women.

In 2003, Streisand sued aerial photographer Kenneth Adelman for displaying a photograph of her Malibu, California home, along with 12,000 other photos of the California coastline taken to illustrate coastal erosion. The picture had at that point been downloaded a total of six times, two of which were by Streisand's lawyers. The suit had the unintended consequence of drawing attention to the photograph, which suddenly became wildly popular and was rapidly copied to multiple mirror sites outside the immediate reach of US law. Her lawsuit was eventually dismissed under the anti-Strategic lawsuit against public participation (SLAPP) provisions of California law and she was ordered to pay Adelman's legal fees. Mike Masnick of Techdirt coined the term "Streisand effect" in January 2005 to describe the publicity generated by Streisand's efforts to suppress the publication of the photograph.

Streisand has been nominated 43 times for a Grammy Award, winning eight. In addition, she has received two special non-competitive awards; the 1992 Grammy Legend Award and the 1994 Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award. She has also been inducted into the Grammy Hall of Fame four times. In 2011, she was honored as MusiCares Person of the Year by the Grammy Foundation for her artistic achievement in the music industry.

Streisand has won two Academy Awards (Oscar) against five nominations: two for acting, two for songwriting and one for Best Picture. She won Oscars for Best Actress ("Funny Girl") and Best Original Song ("Evergreen"). The three films she directed received a total of fourteen Oscar nominations.

Streisand has stated she is writing her autobiography but has stopped and started at various points. In May 2015, Viking Press announced it had bought Streisand's memoirs, which will cover her entire life and career, and would publish it in 2017.



</doc>
