 Marion Cotillard  Marion Cotillard () is a French actress, singer-songwriter, musician, environmentalist, and spokesperson for Greenpeace who achieved international fame with the film "La Vie en Rose" (2007). She is the recipient of an Academy Award, a BAFTA Award, a Golden Globe Award, two César Awards, a European Award, and a Lumières Award. Cotillard has appeared in more than 50 feature films and is also known for being the face of Lady Dior handbags since 2008. She became a Knight of the Order of Arts and Letters in France in 2010 and promoted to Officer in 2016. She was named "The Most Bankable French Actress of the 21st Century" in 2014, and described as "the great silent film actress of our time" by Robbie Collin of "The Daily Telegraph" for her ability to show emotions only with her eyes and facial expressions, although she has never appeared in a silent film. She received France's highest honor and was made a Knight of the Legion of Honour in 2016.  Cotillard had her first English-language role in the TV series "" in 1993, made her film debut in "The Story of a Boy Who Wanted to Be Kissed" (1994), her first leading role in the TV film "Chloé" (1996), and made her breakthrough in France playing Lilly Bertineau in the action-comedy "Taxi" (1998), which earned her a César Award nomination for Most Promising Actress and was her first box office hit. She made her Hollywood debut as Joséphine Bloom in Tim Burton's "Big Fish" (2003).  Since 2003, Cotillard has alternated between French and English-language roles in mainstream and art-house productions, and has received international acclaim and awards for her performances in films such as Tina Lombardi in "A Very Long Engagement" (2004), for which she won her first César Award for Best Supporting Actress. For her portrayal of the French singer Édith Piaf in the biopic "La Vie en Rose" (2007), Cotillard achieved worldwide recognition and won her second César Award, a BAFTA Award, a Golden Globe Award, a Lumières Award and the Academy Award for Best Actress, becoming the first and (as of 2018) only actor to win an Academy Award for a performance in French, and also the second actress and one of only six actors to have won this award for a part spoken in a foreign language. Her performance of Luisa Contini in the musical film "Nine" (2009), earned her a second Golden Globe nomination. She next starred in Michael Mann's "Public Enemies" (2009) as Billie Frechette, and played Mal in Christopher Nolan's "Inception" (2010).  In 2012, she received widespread critical acclaim for her performance as the double amputee orca trainer Stéphanie in "Rust and Bone" (2012), and was nominated for the Golden Globes, BAFTAs, Critics' Choice, Screen Actors Guild and the César Awards. She was highly acclaimed and awarded for her lead performances in "The Immigrant" (2013) and "Two Days, One Night" (2014), receiving a second Academy Award nomination for Best Actress for the latter, which was also her second nomination for a French-language film and the first time an actor was nominated for a Belgian film. Cotillard became one of only six actors to receive multiple Academy Award nominations for foreign-language performances.  Cotillard played Joan of Arc on stage in different countries between 2005 and 2015 in the oratorio "Jeanne d'Arc au bûcher". Her English-language roles include Fanny Chenal in "A Good Year" (2006), Adriana in "Midnight in Paris" (2011), Dr. Leonora Orantes in "Contagion" (2011), Miranda Tate in "The Dark Knight Rises" (2012), Lady Macbeth in "Macbeth" (2015), Marianne Beausejour in "Allied" (2016) and Dr. Sofia Rikkin in "Assassin's Creed" (2016). She provided voice acting for animated films as The Rose in "The Little Prince" (2015), April in "April and the Extraordinary World" (2015) and Scarlet Overkill in the French version of "Minions" (2015). Her other notable French and Belgian films include "La Belle Verte" (1996), "Furia" (1999), "War in the Highlands" (1999), "Lisa" (2001), "Pretty Things" (2001), "Love Me If You Dare" (2003), "Innocence" (2004), "Toi et Moi" (2006) and "Dikkenek" (2006).  Cotillard was born in Paris, and grew up around Orléans, in an artistically inclined, "bustling, creative household". Her father, Jean-Claude Cotillard, is an actor, teacher, former mime, and 2006 Molière Award-winning director, of Breton descent. Cotillard's mother, , who has Kabyle ancestry, is also an actress and drama teacher. Her two younger brothers, Quentin and Guillaume, are twins. Guillaume is a screenwriter and director. Cotillard began acting during her childhood, appearing in one of her father's plays.  After small appearances and performances in theatre, Cotillard had occasional, minor roles in television series such as "" – where she had her first English-speaking role aged 17, appearing as Lori Bellian in the episode "Nowhere to Run"; she also had an uncredited role in the episode "Saving Grace", in which she appeared giving birth.  Her career as a film actress began in the mid-1990s with minor roles in films like Philippe Harel's "The Story of a Boy Who Wanted to Be Kissed", which was her feature film debut at the age of 18; in Arnaud Desplechin's "My Sex Life... or How I Got into an Argument", and the comedy "La Belle Verte", directed by Coline Serreau.  In 1996, Cotillard had her first leading role in the TV film "Chloé", directed by Dennis Berry, with Cotillard playing the title role, a teenage runaway who is forced into prostitution, co-starring Anna Karina.  In 1998, she appeared in Gérard Pirès' action comedy "Taxi", playing Lilly Bertineau, the girlfriend of delivery boy Daniel, played by Samy Naceri. The film was a hit in France and she was nominated for a César Award for Most Promising Actress. Cotillard reprised the role in two sequels: "Taxi 2" and "Taxi 3".  She then ventured into science fiction with Alexandre Aja's post-apocalyptic romantic drama, "Furia" in 1999. That same year, Cotillard starred in the Swiss war drama film "War in the Highlands" ("La Guerre dans le Haut Pays"), for which she won the Best Actress Award at the Autrans Film Festival in 1999.  In 2001, she appeared in Pierre Grimblat's film "Lisa", playing the title role and younger version of Jeanne Moreau's character, co-starring with Benoît Magimel and Sagamore Stévenin. In the same year, she starred in Gilles Paquet-Brenner's film "Pretty Things" ("Les Jolies Choses"), adapted from the work of feminist writer Virginie Despentes. In the drama, Cotillard portrayed twins of completely opposite characters, Lucie and Marie, and she was nominated for a César Award for Most Promising Actress for her performances.  In 2002, Cotillard starred in Guillaume Nicloux's thriller "A Private Affair" ("Une Affaire Privée"), in which she portrayed the mysterious Clarisse.  In 2003, Cotillard had a notable supporting role in Tim Burton's film "Big Fish" playing Joséphine, the French wife of Billy Crudup's character, William Bloom. "Big Fish" was her first American film and she appeared alongside Helena Bonham Carter, Albert Finney, Ewan McGregor, Jessica Lange and Allison Lohman, In the same year, she starred in the French romantic comedy film "Love Me If You Dare" ("Jeux d'enfants"), as Sophie Kowalsky, the daughter of Polish immigrants. The film was directed by Yann Samuel and was a box office hit in France.  In 2004, she won the Chopard Trophy of Female Revelation at the Cannes Film Festival. She also appeared in two critically acclaimed films: Jean-Pierre Jeunet's "A Very Long Engagement" ("Un Long Dimanche de Fiançailles"), as the vengeful Tina Lombardi, for which she won a César Award for Best Supporting Actress, and the mystery thriller "Innocence", as Mademoiselle Éva.  In 2005, Cotillard starred in six films: Steve Suissa's romantic drama "Cavalcade" as Alizée; in Abel Ferrara's religious drama "Mary", alongside Forest Whitaker and Juliette Binoche; portrayed Isabelle Kruger and Alice in the thriller film "The Black Box" ("La Boîte Noire"), directed by Richard Berry; starred in the romantic comedy "Love Is in the Air" ("Ma vie en l'air"); in the drama "Burnt Out" ("Sauf le respect que je vous dois") and "Edy", directed by Stéphan Guérin-Tillié.  In 2006, the actress starred in four films, including Ridley Scott's romantic comedy "A Good Year", in which she portrayed Fanny Chenal, a French café owner in a small Provençal town, opposite Russell Crowe as a Londoner who inherits a local property. She played Nadine in the Belgian comedy "Dikkenek" alongside Mélanie Laurent; also appeared in "Fair Play" as Nicole, and in the satirical coming-of-age film "Toi et moi", for which she learned to play the cello for her role.  Cotillard was chosen by director Olivier Dahan to portray the French singer Édith Piaf in the biopic "La Vie en Rose", before he had even met her, saying that he noticed a similarity between Piaf's and Cotillard's eyes. Producer Alain Goldman accepted and defended the choice even though distributors TFM reduced the money they gave to finance the film thinking Cotillard wasn't "bankable" enough an actress. Her portrayal was widely praised, including by the eminent theatre director Sir Trevor Nunn, who described it as "one of the greatest performances on film ever." At the Berlin International Film Festival, where the film premiered, Cotillard was given a 15-minute standing ovation. Powerful Hollywood talent agent, Hylda Queally, signed Cotillard shortly after "La Vie en Rose" premiered at the Berlin Film Festival.  "La Vie en Rose" was dubbed "the most awaited film of 2007" in France, where some critics said that Cotillard had reincarnated Édith Piaf to sing one last time on stage. The film was a box office hit in France, gathering over 5 million admissions and grossing $86 million worldwide on a $25 million budget.  Cotillard is the first actress to win a Golden Globe for a foreign language performance since 1972, when Liv Ullmann won for "The Emigrants". She is also the first person to win a (Comedy or Musical) Golden Globe for a foreign language performance. On 10 February 2008, Cotillard became the first French actress to be awarded the BAFTA Award for Best Actress in a Leading Role since Stéphane Audran in 1973.  On 22 February 2008, she was awarded the César Award for Best Actress for her performance in "La Vie en Rose". Alain Delon presented the award and announced the winner as "La Môme Marion" (The Kid Marion), also praising her on stage saying: "Marion, I give you this César. I think this César is for a great great actress, and I know what I'm talking about". Two days later, on 24 February 2008 at the Academy Awards, she won Best Actress, becoming the first woman and second person (after Adrien Brody, "The Pianist") to win both a César and an Oscar for the same performance. Cotillard is the second French cinema actress to win this award and the third overall to receive an Academy Award after Simone Signoret in 1960 and Juliette Binoche in 1997. She is the first Best Actress winner in a non-English language performance since Sophia Loren's win in 1961. She is also the first and (as of 2018) only winner of an Academy Award for a performance in the French language. In her Oscar acceptance speech, Cotillard proclaimed "thank you life, thank you love" and, speaking of Los Angeles, said "it is true, there is some angels "(sic)" in this city!" The day following the ceremony, Cotillard was congratulated and praised by the President of France, Nicolas Sarkozy, in a statement saying,  "La Vie En Rose" was partly a Czech production, as Cotillard mentioned in her César acceptance speech. On 1 March 2008, Cotillard won a Czech Lion Award for Best Actress. She could not attend the ceremony in Prague due to the filming of "Public Enemies". Her friend Pavlína Němcová – who played the journalist in "La vie en Rose" – was there to accept the award on her behalf.  Cotillard won a total of 27 awards for her performance in "La Vie en Rose".  On 24 June 2008, Cotillard was one of 105 individuals invited to join the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences.  In 2009, Cotillard starred alongside Johnny Depp and Christian Bale in the role of Billie Frechette in Michael Mann's "Public Enemies", which was released in the United States on 1 July 2009. Later that year, she appeared in the film adaptation of the musical "Nine", directed by Rob Marshall, playing Luisa Contini, the wife of Guido, played by Daniel Day-Lewis. In the film, Cotillard performs two musical numbers: ""My Husband Makes Movies"" and ""Take It All"".  As of 2018, the official music video for the song ""Take It All"" performed by Cotillard, has over 1,7 million views on YouTube. On 15 December 2009, Cotillard was nominated for a Golden Globe for Best Actress in a Motion Picture – Musical or Comedy for her performance in "Nine". Cotillard appeared on the cover of the November 2009 issue of "Vogue" with her "Nine" co-stars, and on the July 2010 cover by herself.  "TIME" ranked Cotillard's performance in "Nine" as the fifth best performance by a female in 2009, behind Mo'Nique, Carey Mulligan, Saoirse Ronan and Meryl Streep. She was awarded the Desert Palm Achievement Actress Award at the 2010 Palm Springs International Film Festival for her performance in the film – her second prize from the festival.  On 27 February 2010, she was the Honorary President of the 35th César Awards Ceremony.  She played Mal Cobb, a projection of Leonardo DiCaprio's character, Dom Cobb's deceased wife in Christopher Nolan's film "Inception", also starring Tom Hardy, Joseph Gordon-Levitt, Cillian Murphy, Ken Watanabe, Michael Caine and Ellen Page, which released on 16 July 2010. Nolan described Mal as "the essence of the femme fatale", and DiCaprio praised Cotillard's performance saying that "she can be strong and vulnerable and hopeful and heartbreaking all in the same moment, which was perfect for all the contradictions of her character". Cotillard and Leonardo DiCaprio ranked No. 8 on Forbes' list of ""Hollywood's Top Earning On-Screen Couples"" for "Inception", which made $825 million at the worldwide box-office. They are the only couple from a non-franchise film. In the same year, she also starred in Guillaume Canet's drama "Little White Lies" ("Les petits mouchoirs"), playing the environmentalist Marie, alongside Jean Dujardin and François Cluzet.  In 2011, she starred in Woody Allen's "Midnight in Paris" alongside Rachel McAdams, Owen Wilson and Kathy Bates. In the film, Cotillard played Adriana, a fictionalized mistress of Pablo Picasso with whom Owen Wilson's character, Gil, falls in love. As of 2016, "Midnight in Paris" is the highest-grossing film of Allen's career, with $151 million worldwide on a $17 million budget. She also co-starred alongside Kate Winslet, Jude Law, Gwyneth Paltrow and Matt Damon in Steven Soderbergh's thriller film "Contagion". Also that year, Cotillard appeared on the top of "Le Figaro"s list of the highest paid actors in France in 2010, the first time in nine years that a female has topped the list, and she was also tied with Kate Winslet as the highest paid foreign actress in Hollywood.  In 2012, Cotillard was ranked No. 9 on the list of the highest paid actresses in France in 2011, and appeared in Christopher Nolan's film "The Dark Knight Rises", playing Miranda Tate, a board member at Wayne Enterprises. The film reunited the actress with her "Inception" co-stars Joseph Gordon-Levitt, Michael Caine, Cillian Murphy and Tom Hardy. It also reunited her with "Public Enemies" co-star Christian Bale. She next starred in Jacques Audiard's drama "Rust and Bone" ("De rouille et d'os") alongside Matthias Schoenaerts. The film premiered at the 2012 Cannes Film Festival and received a ten-minute standing ovation at the end of its screening. Cotillard received rave reviews for her performance as the orca trainer Stéphanie, who loses her legs after an accident at work and begins a strange relationship with Schoenaerts' character. She also won the Globe de Cristal Award, Étoile d'Or Award, Sant Jordi Award, Irish Film & Television Award and the Hawaii International Film Festival Award for Best Actress and received a fifth César Award nomination, a fourth Screen Actors Guild Award nomination, a third Golden Globe nomination (her first nomination for Best Actress – Drama), a second Critics' Choice Award nomination and a second Lumières Award nomination.  Cate Blanchett wrote an op-ed for Variety praising Cotillard's performance in "Rust and Bone", describing it as "simply astonishing" and stating that "Marion has created a character of nobility and candour, seamlessly melding herself into a world we could not have known without her. Her performance is as unexpected and as unsentimental and raw as the film itself".  Also in 2012, Cotillard received several honors and career tributes at the Telluride Film Festival, Hollywood Film Festival, AFI Fest, Gotham Awards and Harper's Bazaar Awards.  In 2013, Cotillard was named Hasty Pudding Theatricals' Woman of the Year by Harvard students. She was also ranked the 2nd highest paid actress in France in 2012. In May 2013, she appeared in the controversial music video ""The Next Day"" by David Bowie, alongside Gary Oldman, her co-star in "The Dark Knight Rises".  She had her first leading role in an American movie in James Gray's "The Immigrant", starring as the Polish immigrant Ewa Cybulska, who wants to experience the American dream in 1920's New York, starring opposite Joaquin Phoenix and Jeremy Renner. James Gray wrote the movie especially for Cotillard after meeting her at a French restaurant with her boyfriend. Gray stated that Cotillard is the best actor he's ever worked with. Cotillard had to learn 20 pages of Polish dialogue for her role. Her performance was widely acclaimed at the 2013 Cannes Film Festival where the film premiered. "The Immigrant" was released in the U.S. in May 2014, exactly one year after its Cannes premiere, and was highly praised by American critics, especially Cotillard's performance, which was awarded the New York Film Critics Circle Award, the National Society of Film Critics Award, the Toronto Film Critics Association Award and was nominated for a Spirit Award for Best Actress in 2015. She then co-starred in Guillaume Canet's "Blood Ties", alongside Clive Owen, Billy Crudup and her "Rust and Bone" co-star Matthias Schoenaerts, the film premiering at Cannes in the same week that "The Immigrant" premiered. Cotillard also had a cameo in "", acting opposite Jim Carrey as a Canadian anchor in the battle scene between rival news teams.  From November to December 2013, she was a member of the jury of the 13th Marrakech Film Festival that was presided by Martin Scorsese. In 2014, she starred in Dardenne brothers' "Two Days, One Night" ("Deux jours, une nuit"). In the film, Cotillard plays Sandra, a Belgian factory worker who has just one weekend to convince her workmates to give up their bonuses so that she can keep her job. The film premiered at the 2014 Cannes Film Festival and Cotillard's performance was unanimously praised by critics, earned a 15-minute standing ovation and was named "the best performance of the festival". For her performance in the film, Cotillard received several critics awards, a European Film Award, was nominated for a second Academy Award and for a sixth César Award.  Cotillard's performances in "The Immigrant" and "Two Days, One Night" shared the fourth spot of "TIME"s list of Best Movie Performances of 2014.  On 22 January 2014, it was announced that Cotillard would star in the New York Philharmonic's production of Arthur Honegger's oratorio ""Joan of Arc at the Stake"". Cotillard had previously starred in a production of the 1938 dramatic oratorio alongside the Orléans Orchestra in 2005 and with the Barcelona Symphony Orchestra in 2012. The new production, staged by the director Côme de Bellescize, was first created for Japan's Saito Kinen Festival Matsumoto in 2012, and featured members of the Comédie-Française. It hit the stage of the Avery Fisher Hall in June 2015. Cotillard also performed the oratorio in Paris in March 2015.  In November 2014, Cotillard participated on Comedy Central's All-Star Non-Denominational Christmas Special in a duet with Nathan Fielder singing Elvis Presley's song "Can't Help Falling in Love".  In 2015, Cotillard took on the role of Lady Macbeth in a film adaption of William Shakespeare's play Macbeth, directed by Justin Kurzel and starring Michael Fassbender in the title role. The film premiered at the Cannes Film Festival on 23 May, receiving generally positive reviews at the festival and during its release in the United Kingdom and the United States, and although her accent earned mixed reviews, Cotillard's performance still earned high praise from critics, particularly for her rendition of the famous "Out, Damned Spot" monologue. "Variety"'s critic, Guy Lodge, noted that it was a performance that "contains both the woman's abandoned self and her worst-case incarnation, often in the space of a single scene," and remarked that "Her deathless sleepwalking scene, staged in minimalist fashion under a gauze of snowflakes in a bare chapel, is played with tender, desolate exhaustion; it deserves to be viewed as near-definitive." Cotillard was nominated for the British Independent Film Award for Best Actress for her performance.  She voiced The Rose in both the English and the French version in a 3D animated adaptation of "The Little Prince", directed by Mark Osborne, was the voice of Scarlet Overkill in the French version of "Minions", and also voiced April, the lead role in the French-Canadian-Belgian 3D animated film "April and the Extraordinary World" ("Avril et le Monde Truqué"), directed by Franck Ekinci and Christian Demares.  In 2016, Cotillard played Gabrielle, the lead role in Nicole Garcia's "From the Land of the Moon" ("Mal de Pierres"), an adaptation of the bestselling Italian novel ""Mal di Pietre"" (""From the Land of the Moon"" in US, Canada and UK and ""The House in Via Manno"" in Australia) by Milena Agus. The film marked Cotillard's return to French cinema after 2012's "Rust and Bone", and earned her a seventh César Award nomination. In the same year, she played Catherine in Xavier Dolan's "It's Only the End of the World" ("Juste la fin du Monde"). Both films subsequently premiered in the main competition section of the 2016 Cannes Film Festival.  Cotillard next appeared opposite Brad Pitt in "Allied", a spy film set in World War II directed by Robert Zemeckis, in which she played Marianne Beausejour, a French Resistance fighter. It was released in the United States and France on 23 November 2016.  Cotillard re-teamed with "Macbeth" director Justin Kurzel and co-star Michael Fassbender in the movie adaptation of the video game "Assassin's Creed", which was released on 21 December 2016.  On 30 January 2017, Cotillard was honored with a special award for her career at the 22nd Lumières Awards in France.  In 2017, Cotillard starred in Arnaud Desplechin's "Ismael's Ghosts" ("Les Fantomes d'Ismaël"), alongside Mathieu Amalric, Charlotte Gainsbourg and Louis Garrel.  Cotillard sings, plays guitar, bass guitar, keyboard and tambourine.  She co-wrote and performed the song "La Fille De Joie" for her film "Pretty Things" ("Les Jolies Choses"), in which she played a singer and also performed the song "La Conne" for this film.  Canadian singer Hawksley Workman, said in interviews about his album "Between the Beautifuls", that he worked and wrote songs with Cotillard while they both were in Los Angeles during the 2007–2008 movie awards season.  In 2008, she co-wrote and performed the song "The Strong Ones" alongside Hawksley Workman for Olivier Dahan's short film for Cartier's Love range.  In 2010, Cotillard recorded the songs "Five Thousand Nights" and "Happy Crowd" with the French Rock band Yodelice for their album "Cardioid". She also went on tour with the band in different cities in France and Belgium, under the pseudonym "Simone", which is her maternal grandmother's name. In the same year, she appeared in the video "More Than Meets the Eyes" from Yodelice.  She also recorded the song "The Eyes of Mars" alongside Franz Ferdinand especially for Dior.  In 2012, she wrote and performed the song "Lily's Body" for the fourth episode of the "Lady Dior Web Documentary" with the same title.  In 2014, Cotillard wrote and performed the song "Snapshot in LA" alongside John Cameron Mitchell, Metronomy's Joseph Mount and Villaine. The song earned a music video that was written and co-directed by Cotillard herself especially for Lady Dior's campaign "Enter the Game – Dior Cuise 2015".   In 2008, Cotillard was chosen as the face of Dior's bag "Lady Dior" and was featured in an online mini-movie directed by John Cameron Mitchell about the fictional character created by John Galliano.  She starred in a series of short films that were situated in different cities to promote the "Lady Dior" handbags: "Lady Noire Affair" (in Paris) directed by Olivier Dahan, "Lady Blue Shanghai" directed by David Lynch, "Lady Rouge" (in New York City) directed by Jonas Akerlund and "Lady Grey London" directed by John Cameron Mitchell and starring Ian McKellen and Russell Tovey.  This campaign has also resulted in a musical collaboration with Scottish rock band Franz Ferdinand, where Cotillard has provided the vocals for a composition performed by the group, entitled "The Eyes of Mars", for the "Lady Rouge" campaign.  In 2012, she starred in the web-series "Lady Dior Web Documentary" and wrote and performed the song "Lily's body" for one episode, she also designed her own handbag for Dior, the "360° bag". Cotillard also appeared on the cover of the first issue of "Dior Magazine" in September 2012.  In 2014, she wrote and co-directed alongside Eliott Bliss, a music video for her song "Snapshot in LA", especially for Lady Dior's campaign "Enter The Game – Dior Cuise 2015".  In the late 90s, Cotillard was in a relationship with French actor Julien Rassam. She had a long-term relationship with French actor Stéphan Guérin-Tillié from 2000 to 2005. They co-starred in the short films "Quelques jours de trop" (2000) and "Heureuse" (2001), in the 2001 TV series "Les redoutables", and in the 2005 feature films "Cavalcade" and "Edy". She dated French singer Sinclair from 2005 to 2007.  Since October 2007, Cotillard has been in a relationship with French actor and director Guillaume Canet. They had been friends since 1997, and co-starred together for the first time years later in the 2003 film "Love Me If You Dare". Despite common misconception, the couple are not married. Though since 2010 Cotillard has been spotted wearing a diamond solitaire on her left hand – a present from Canet – they are not engaged either. In 2014, Cotillard denied being married to Canet, instead referring to him as "my boyfriend" in interviews. In 2011 they had their first child, a son, and in 2017 their second child, a daughter was born.  In addition to her film work, Cotillard is active in philanthropy, environmental activism, and has participated in campaigns for environmental protection, in particular Greenpeace, for whom she has been a member and acted as a spokesperson since 2001. She is also a member of WWF and the Nicolas Hulot Foundation, which supports environmental initiatives in France and abroad to engage the ecological transition of our societies.  In 2005, she contributed to "Dessins pour le climat" ("Drawings for the Climate"), a book of drawings published by Greenpeace to raise funds for the group, and in 2010, she travelled to Congo with Greenpeace to visit tropical rainforests threatened by logging companies, it was shown in the documentary "The Congolese Rainforests: Living on Borrowed Time".  In 2009, Cotillard was one of many celebrities to record a cover version of the song "Beds are Burning" by Midnight Oil, in support of TckTckTck and climate justice. In the same year, Cotillard designed her own doll for UNICEF France campaign ""Les Frimousses Font Leur Cinéma"", that was sold to help vaccinate thousands of children in Darfur.  In 2011, she publicly supported Chief Raoni in his fight against the Belo Monte Dam in Brazil and signed his petition.  Cotillard is the patron of Maud Fontenoy Foundation, a non-governmental organization which is dedicated to teaching children about preserving the oceans. She is also the ambassador of , a French association that supports indigenous peoples for their rights and the preservation of their cultures and the Amazon Forest they inhabit.  In 2012, Cotillard was featured on Kate Winslet's book ""The Golden Hat: Talking Back To Autism"", with celebrity self-portraits to raise awareness and support for autism launched by Winslet's Golden Hat Foundation.  In 2013, she caged herself near Paris's Louvre museum to demand the freeing of 30 Greenpeace activists jailed in Russia over an Arctic protest. She entered the cage and held a banner proclaiming "I am a climate defender".  Cotillard also supports The Heart Fund, an international public charity that is a pioneer in technological innovation to combat cardiovascular diseases in children.  In February 2014, she signed ""The Tiger Manifesto"", a campaign calling for an end to everyday products being manufactured through forest destruction. Launched by Greenpeace, the campaign is encouraging consumers to demand products are forest and tiger-friendly, particularly in Indonesia, where the Sumatran tiger is on brink of extinction.  On 21 May 2014, Greenpeace released the animated video ""The Amazon's Silent Crisis"", narrated by Cotillard. The video highlights the troubling illegal logging that threatens the Brazilian Amazon.  On 26 February 2015, she went to the Philippines along France's President François Hollande and actress Mélanie Laurent, to participate on a forum and encourage faster and more determined action on the global challenge of climate change.  At the 2015 Cannes Film Festival, director Mark Osborne revealed that Cotillard used to visit Children's Hospitals and play The Rose (from the book The Little Prince) for the kids, years before she voiced the character in the 2015 film "The Little Prince", directed by Osborne.  Cotillard was the ambassador of ""1 Heart 1 Tree"", an art project that fights climate change through its "Plant for the Planet" reforestation program. On 29 November 2015, The Eiffel Tower became a virtual forest with trees and words encouraging environmental activism projected onto it every evening. Cotillard and UN Secretary General Ban Ki-Moon, inaugurated the light installation on the eve of the official opening of the COP21 conference. She also donated her shoes to be displayed among an installation of over 10,000 shoes at the Place de la Republique in Paris. The installation replaced a giant march for climate change which was forbidden by French authorities following the deadly attacks in the capital on 13 November, which cost 130 lives. It was a way of showing the determination of protesters in their fight against climate change, and allowed them to still send a strong message on the eve of the U.N. climate conference (COP21).  On 10 December 2015, Cotillard voiced the French version of the short film "Home", made by Conservation International (CI). The short film debuted at the United Nations Momentum for Change Awards ceremony at the climate negotiations (COP21) in Paris. It was the latest addition to CI's award-winning "Nature Is Speaking" short film series. "Home" was produced to remind negotiators and world leaders at the climate talks of our common duty – how to care for the Earth that cares for us all. ""This Earth is our shared home, our only home. The time to safeguard its future – and with it our own future – is right now,"" said Cotillard.  As of 2018, Cotillard has appeared on more than 300 magazine covers around the world, such as "Vogue", "Elle", "Marie Claire", "Variety", "Harper's Bazaar", "Vanity Fair", "Madame Figaro", "Glamour", "W", "Porter", "The Hollywood Reporter" and "Wall Street Journal Magazine". In August 2012, Cotillard was featured in three major magazine covers: the American Vogue, Vogue Paris and Marie Claire UK. She was also featured on the cover of the first issue of Dior Magazine in September 2012.  Cotillard was named "The Most Beautiful Face of 2013" by The Independent Critics List of the 100 Most Beautiful Famous Faces From Around the World, and ranked as one of the most "Beautiful Famous Faces" for 16 consecutive years. She was ranked No. 47 in 2017, No. 36 in 2016, No. 18 in 2015, No. 14 in 2014, No. 1 in 2013, No. 2 in 2012, No. 7 in 2011, No. 12 in 2010, No. 15 in 2009, No. 4 in 2008, No. 3 in 2007, No. 8 in 2006, No. 17 in 2005, No. 35 in 2004, No. 20 in 2003, and No. 31 in 2002.  Was the first actress on a Vogue Paris September cover in five years with her September 2010 cover.  Named "Woman of the Decade" by Vogue Paris on their list of the "40 Women of The Decade" in 2010.  In 2012, Cotillard was named "The World's Sexiest Woman" by the Hungarian magazine Periodika.  In 2013, she was ranked No. 13 on Empire Online's list of the "100 Sexiest Movie Stars", was No. 12 on French magazine Slate's list of the "100 Most Influential Women of France", No. 68 on Total Film's list of "Top 200 Performances of All Time" for her performance in "La Vie en Rose", and named "Best Dressed Star of 2013" by the British Grazia magazine.  In 2014, she was described as "the great silent film actress of our time" by British film critic Robbie Collin from The Daily Telegraph, for her ability to show emotions only with her eyes and facial expressions, although she has never appeared in a silent film, and was named "The Most Bankable French Actress of the 21st Century", her films accumulating more than 37 million ticket sales in France from 2001 to 2014.  Ranked No. 18 on British GQ Magazine's list of "The World's 20 Coolest Women" in 2014.  Chosen as one of the 'Best Film Femme Fatales' by Harper's Bazaar in 2014, for her performance as Mal in "Inception".  In April 2016, Vox.com analysed the actresses who have starred in the best reviewed films ranked by average Metacritic rating, and Cotillard was No. 3 with an average score of 68.  Ranked No. 2 on Google's "Most Searched Actresses of 2016".  Cotillard was featured on the official poster of the 42nd César Awards in 2017.  Has a look-alike puppet in the French TV show "Les Guignols de l'info" since 2013.  Was mentioned on Jodie Foster's Golden Globe speech in 2013. Foster said: "[...] "But now I'm told, apparently, that every celebrity is expected to honor the details of their private life with a press conference, a fragrance and a prime-time reality show. You know, you guys might be surprised, but I am not Honey Boo Boo Child. No, I'm sorry, that's just not me. It never was and it never will be. Please don't cry because my reality show would be so boring. I would have to make out with Marion Cotillard or I'd have to spank Daniel Craig's bottom just to stay on the air. It's not bad work if you can get it, though."".  A sample of Cotillard and Leonardo DiCaprio's dialogue in the train scene from "Inception" ("You're waiting for a train..."), is featured on the song "Far Away" by nExow at minute 03:28.  In 2014, Brazilian brand Chara Rial named a Mocassin shoes after her.  In April 2015, the French rap band Columbine released a song titled "Marion". During the chorus, they sing "Je t'aime, t'es belle comme Marion Cotillard" ("I love you, you're as pretty as Marion Cotillard", in French).  Cecily Strong has impersonated Cotillard four times on "Saturday Night Live", on the episodes aired on April 11, 2015, October 1, 2016, May 13, 2017 and October 10, 2017, respectively.  As of 2018, Cotillard's films have grossed more than $3 billion at the worldwide box-office.  Cotillard has dubbed several films and documentaries in France and in the U.S., and also dubbed in French all of her roles in English-language films. Among other awards, Cotillard has received an Academy Award for Best Actress, a Golden Globe Award, a BAFTA Award, two César Awards, a Lumières Award and a European Film Award. She has also won a New York Film Critics Circle Award, a National Society of Film Critics Award, and a Los Angeles Film Critics Association Award for Best Actress, the critics' awards trifecta. Cotillard and Isabelle Adjani are the only French actresses to win the New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Actress. Adjani won in 1975 for "The Story of Adele H." (1975), while Cotillard was awarded for her performances in "The Immigrant" (2013) and "Two Days, One Night" (2014) in 2014.  In March 2010, Cotillard was made a Chevalier (Knight) of the Ordre des Arts et des Lettres (Order of the Arts and Letters) by the French government for her "contribution to the enrichment of French culture". She was promoted to Officer on 10 February 2016.  On 14 July 2016, Cotillard received France's highest honour – she was named a Chevalier (Knight) of the Légion d'Honneur (Legion of Honor). The actress was among 650 names from the worlds of politics, culture, sport and public life published in the government's official journal for Bastille Day