 Home (2016 British film)  Home is a British-Kosovan drama short film. It stars Jack O'Connell (actor) and Holliday Grainger written and directed by Daniel Mulloy. "Home" was Nominated for the European Film Academy Award and went on to win the BAFTA Award for Best Short Film.   Thousands of men, women and children struggle to get into Europe as a comfortable English family leave, on what appears to be a holiday.  The film was made in association with the United Nations and released in UK cinemas on World Refugee Day 2016.   Before the "Home" premiere actress and "Home" Executive Producer Arta Dobroshi made clear her wish for the future: ""The biggest privilege of the career she now enjoys, she says, is the opportunity it gives her to tell the refugees’ story and make it meaningful and relevant. “My greatest hope now,” she says, “is that in maybe 10 or 20 years, or even 40, our children or grandchildren will say, can you imagine? There were actually times in the past when the people who lived in freedom wouldn’t help the refugees. There really were those times.”"" excerpt from The Guardian interview with Arta Dobroshi by Joanna Moorhead   Time the director spent living with refugees, who were being deported, was key to "Home"'s creation:  ""We began chatting and I learned that their clothes had been donated to them by nuns and their son had just been operated on after falling ill sleeping on the floor of a Hungarian jail cell. We were in Kosovo and they were being returned to a nightmare that they had risked their lives to escape. I left them feeling sickened and disturbed. I then returned to the UK, billboards were up on streets that were overtly racist and our politicians were dehumanising those fleeing war zones, referring to them as ‘swarms’ and living in ‘jungles’. The film grew out of the fact that wanted to respond."" Daniel Mulloy from Dazed interview by Trey Taylor  "Home" premiered at the 2016 South by Southwest and went on to win the British Academy Film Awards. 